THE GERSON THERAPY

The Proven Nutritional Program for
Cancer and Other Illnesses

REVISED AND UPDATED

Charlotte Gerson and Morton
Walker, D.P.M.


Kensington Books
http://www.kensingtonbooks.com
The marks GERSON, GERSON THERAPY and GERSON INSTITUTE are trademarks and/or
service marks owned by and proprietary to the Gerson Institute, Bonita, California and are
covered by appropriate domestic and/or foreign registrations and/or protective laws. All other
To Max Gerson, M.D., who, for having developed viable
therapies for the permanent remission of cancer, was challenged by individual
interests in the cancer industry because, by application of the Gerson Therapy,
these interests would be put out of business. Today, nearly half a century later,
such legitinuzed interests continue to flourish at the expense of ill people around
the world.
About the Authors

Charlotte Gerson, the youngest daughter of Max Gerson, M.D., whom he

lovingly addressed as “Lotte,” was an assistant for her father in his work
on an almost continuous basis. In the first edition of his book A Cancer Therapy:
Results of Fifty Cases, Dr. Gerson thanked her for giving help “wherever she
could with great interest and understanding encouragement.”

Charlotte Gerson was born in Germany and underwent her early schooling
there. When her family fled from Germany to Austria as a means of escaping
what became the holocaust, Lotte attended school in a suburb of Vienna. Later,
upon her father's moving the Gerson family to France, which he considered
safer, she studied French and continued high school under the French
educational system. Dr. Gerson practiced medicine in France for only a short
period under the licensure of another physician.

Next, the Gersons emigrated to England to escape domination by the French
Vichy government. Lotte continued school for a short time in London, where
she started to learn English. She received her high school diploma in New York
City, where the Gerson family finally felt safe and could settle down. Eventually
Dr. Gerson established his medical practice on Park Avenue in Manhattan and
at a clinic in Nanuet, a small town located between Suffern and Nyack in
upstate New York.

The young woman attended Smith College. She is literate in Spanish, which
stands her in good stead since the Gerson Therapy was for close to twenty-five
years primarily administered in Tijuana, Mexico, just across the border from San
Diego, California.
xu About the Authors

Charlotte Gerson visits patients who are currently receiving medically
supervised Gerson Therapy at the Gerson Therapy Hospital. She consults with
these patients’ doctors, studies their progress toward health, answers many
questions from the patients and their companions, lectures on the intricacies of
the Gerson Therapy, and offers everyone encouragement.

This charitable and humanitarian effort is natural for Charlotte Gerson, for
she was always interested in her father’s work. Even as a young woman her
greatest joy involved reading medical literature. She spent much of her free time
assisting Dr. Gerson by translating and writing his papers. She listened to and
critiqued his lectures to health professionals and medical consumers. Often
Charlotte made hospital rounds with her father and acted as one of the medical
assistants at his Oakland Manor Cancer Clinic in Nanuet, New York.

In fact, to become a more valuable aide, Charlotte enrolled in and completed
a formal course for medical assistants, which qualified her to help in patient
nursing work at the Gerson clinic. When Dr. Gerson was absent lecturing,
consulting, or on vacation, she carried out his telephoned instructions regarding
the clinic’s patients.

After the young woman married and became Charlotte Gerson Straus, she
spent a number of years in her husband's import/export enterprise, which
caused her to become familiar with many business techniques. However, the
marriage eventually ended in divorce.

When Dr. Gerson died in 1959, Charlotte carried on by publicizing his last,
classic book, A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases. From public demand and
the need to dispose of three thousand copies, she proceeded to lecture on the
Gerson Therapy. Such lecturing, locally at first and later nationally, was what
gained initial broad distribution for the Gerson title and its healing program.

As a result, Charlotte Gerson has been invited to speak on the Gerson
Therapy at several hundred organizations involved with aspects of health. A
few of them include:

¢ The Cancer Control Society—every year for twenty-five years—in two
California locations, Pasadena and Los Angeles

* The National Health Federation—eighteen locations around the United
States.

* The Alternative and Complementary Therapies Convention in Arlington,
Virginia, put on by the clinical journal publishing house Mary Ann
Liebert, Inc., of Larchmont, New York

* International Association of Cancer Victors and Friends — ten cities
About the Authors xm

* Consumer Health Organization of Canada —Toronto, Ontario, Canada

¢ Australian Health Groups —Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, and the Gold
Coast

¢ “Fit fuers Leben’ (Fit for Life)—Waldthausen Verlag, Munich and Bonn

* The Municipal Hospital—Graz, Austria

¢ The Gerson Support Group —London, England

¢ Wirral Health Clinic — Manchester, England

* Gerson Practitioners Training groups —San Diego, California, and
Sedona, Arizona

Moreover, Charlotte Gerson gives numerous seminars at conventions
organized by the Gerson Institute that are held periodically in many of the
important cities around the United States and Canada, including Honolulu,
Hawaii; and Montreal, Toronto, Ottawa, Calgary, Edmonton, Victoria, and
Vancouver, Canada.

The Gerson Therapy message has been carried to people on numerous
television shows, including twice on Oprah Winfrey's programs in Baltimore
and Chicago, before Oprah joined her national TV network. Charlotte Gerson
has appeared on Christian Broadcasting, Trinity Broadcasting, PBS, cable
stations, and national radio. For example, she is interviewed frequently by Gary
Null, on WBAI, by the syndicated radio columnist Dr. James Winer, and for
magazine articles.

With an associate in 1977, she supervised the establishment of the first
Gerson Therapy hospital in Tijuana, Mexico. Her specific goal then, as it is now,
was applying and teaching the Gerson Therapy to everyone interested in
surviving life-threatening diseases.

To accomplish her task, she helps to train physicians, nurses, kitchen staff,
and patients, and others so that they learn the elements of nutritional treatment.
Some one hundred holistic physicians in the United States and many more
located around the world have been trained by Charlotte Gerson and the
Gerson Institute to practice the Gerson Therapy as the health professionals’
medical tool to reverse degenerative diseases.

This woman, who seems to have no shortage of energy, teaches, coaches, and
trains the Mexican hospital nursing staff, the kitchen staff, the receptionists who
respond to potential patients’ questions, and even the hospital's passenger van
drivers. For the past five years she has written most of the news articles for the
bimonthly Gerson Healing News
XIV About the Authors

letter, and she has created many articles for publication in health magazines.

Her stamina and capacity to perform are not Charlotte Gerson’s only
amazing characteristics. At age seventy-nine, she looks like a much younger
woman. By faithfully following the Gerson Therapy program for prevention,
Charlotte never needed to wear eyeglasses or contact lenses, has all of her own
teeth, exhibits absolutely no liver spots (age spots), suffers from no arthritis or
osteoporosis, and shows a smooth, unblemished complexion. Because she
refuses to use hair dye or any other kind of cosmetic, the hair on her head is
white, her skin appears fair and alabaster, her body remains strong and well
proportioned, and her mind stays acutely sharp. Charlotte Gerson gracefully
grows older, but she is a true reflection of her father’s medical philosophy.

Morton Walker, D.P.M., a former practicing doctor of podiatric medicine for
seventeen years, has for the last thirty years worked full-time as a professional
freelance medical journalist. He has had seventy-three books issued by major
trade publishers, including Bantam Books, Simon & Schuster, Prentice Hall,
Kensington Books, Avery, G. P Putnam's Sons, E .P Dutton, Macmillan, M.
Evans, Keats, Arco, Devin- Adair, Hampton Roads, and more. Twelve of his
book titles have become 150,000- to 2,000,000-copy best-sellers.

Dr. Walker has produced 2,250 clinical journal or magazine articles for about
fifty periodicals, including monthly columns for Health Products Business,
Townsend Letter for Doctors (5- Patients, Healthy (5 Natural, Nutrition Science News,
Explore Professional Journal, a British magazine, and two Australian magazines.
His works have been reprinted in eleven languages in thirty-nine countries, and
the numbers continue to grow.

The result is that twenty-three medical journalism awards and medals have
come his way. Dr. Walker was recognized with the 1992 Humanitarian Award
from the American Cancer Control Society, which named him “the world’s
leading medical journalist specializing in holistic medicine.”

He received the 1981 Orthomolecular Award from the American Institute of
Preventive Medicine for his “outstanding achievement in orthomolecular
education.”

Dr. Walker was presented with the 1979 Humanitarian Award from the 1,250
physician members of the American College for Advancement in
About the Authors xm

Medicine “for informing the American public on alternative methods of
healing.”

And he has received two prestigious Jesse H. Neal Editorial Achievement
Awards from the American Business Press, Inc., for creating the best series of
magazine articles published in any audited United States magazine in both 1975
and 1976.

As a medical journalist who researches and writes exclusively in the areas of
holistic medicine and alternative healing methods, Dr. Morton Walker has been
highlighted by, or appeared as a guest with, Oprah Winfrey, Jay Leno, Sally
Jessy Raphael, Merv Griffin, Mike Douglas, and Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee
Gifford, plus several dozen other television talk show hosts —a minimum of two
thousand media appearances. For example, discussing his book The Power of
Color (Avery Publishing Group), he recently was featured on the early morning
NBC’s Today show. Avery Publishing has given him his own imprint
(subdivision) with the title “A Dr. Morton Walker Health Book,” and this
publisher has issued twelve of his books under that imprint.

Preface

Dr. Max Gerson dedicated his life to the mastery of this scourge of
cancer and all should honor his great work.
—The Honorable United States Senator
Claude Pepper (D-Florida)
his book offers readers a documented means for reversing the pathology of

nearly any illness, whether acute or chronic, when its occurrence is related
to malfunctioning of the immune system or essential organs. Our reader must
be warned, however, that the Gerson program is stringent and difficult to
follow. Assuredly it can save the life of a terminal patient. However, the menu
plan is quite work-intensive and not easily acceptable to friends and
acquaintances who aren’t oriented to holistic health and alternative methods of
healing.

The Gerson Therapy is a natural contemporary, biological treatment, either
self-administered at home or under physician supervision, which uses the
body’s own healing mechanisms for the elimination of debilitating ailments. It
was introduced to Western industrialized nations more than sixty years ago by
Max Gerson, M.D. (1881-1959). This revolutionary dietary program was so far
advanced at the time of its development that no scientific rationale was
available to explain why it produced reversal of chronic and infectious diseases.
But because it actually cured patients with advanced tuberculosis, diabetes,
migraines, heart disease, cancer, arthritis, skin disorders, and numerous other
life-threatening conditions, the Gerson Therapy has long since established itself
as a major contributor to the medical armamentarium.

Dr. Max Gerson treated many hundreds of patients and continued to refine
his therapy until he died in 1959, at the age of seventy-eight. His most famous
patient was medical missionary and philosopher Albert Schweitzer, M_D.,
whom he cured of adult-onset diabetes when Dr
xvi Preface

Schweitzer was seventy-five years old. Completely well after only six weeks of
Dr. Gerson’s therapy, the patient returned to Lambarene in Gabon, French
Equatorial Africa. Dr. Schweitzer ministered to many thousands of African
patients, won the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize, and worked past age ninety. With
diabetes eliminated from his life, Albert Schweitzer lived to be ninety-three
years old.

Incidentally, Dr. Gerson successfully cured lung tuberculosis for Dr.
Schweitzer’s dying wife, Helene. She went on to live another twenty-eight
years. And he healed a serious skin disease for Dr. Schweitzer’s nineteen- year-
old daughter, Rhena. Lotte Gerson and Rhena Schweitzer were friends during
their teen years.

As the eulogy for his close personal friend, Dr. Albert Schweitzer wrote in
sadness: “I see in Dr. Max Gerson one of the most eminent geniuses in the
history of medicine. Many of his basic ideas have been adopted without having
his name connected with them He has achieved more than seemed possible
under adverse conditions. He leaves a legacy which commands attention and
which will assure him his due place. Those whom he cured will now attest to
the truth of his ideas.”

The most complete presentation of the Gerson Therapy program is currently
found in Dr. Gerson’s book A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases, originally
published by him in 1958, the year before his death. It has since been reprinted
thirty-eight times with over 250,000 copies in English. These were distributed
by Dr. Gerson’s daughter, Charlotte (Lotte) Gerson, as well as by the Gerson
Institute. Some 88,000 additional copies were printed in four other languages
and dispersed around the world.

Represented by the Gerson Institute, Charlotte has carried on her father’s
educational work and promoted his treatment protocol for eliminating chronic
diseases of all types, in particular against malignancies.1 The book you are
reading now expands upon that prior book written by Max Gerson, M.D.

MAX GERSON TESTIFIES BEFORE SENATE

During a three-day period, July 1 to 3, 1946, the United States Senate took
testimony from nationally known cancer researchers relating to U.S. Senate Bill
1875, also referred to as the Pepper-Neely anticancer proposal. In this bill, Senators
Pepper and Neely recommended the appropriation of $100 million from the
US. government's budget for cancer researchers to find a cure for cancer once
and for all.

Preface xix

After his two Washington, D.C.-based investigators, a physician and an
attorney, reported back to Senator Claude Pepper (D-Florida) that Dr. Max
Gerson did, indeed, have a successful treatment for cancer for the first time in
history, the United States Senate invited a medical doctor to demonstrate his
specific therapeutic approach for curing cancer. Accordingly, Dr. Gerson
brought five of his cured cancer patients and the records of five more for
presentation before the Pepper-Neely anticancer subcommittee of the Senate
Committee on Foreign Relations of the Seventy-ninth Congress.

The impressive testimony of this anticancer specialist and his patients
caused Senator Pepper to call a press conference for bringing information about
the Gerson Therapy before the media. However, massive numbers of lobbyists
for the immensely wealthy Pharmaceutical Manufacturers’ Association (PMA),
the American Medical Association (AMA), and the American Cancer Society
(ACS) prevailed on reporters to ignore the Gerson press conference and attend
a cocktail party instead where free food would be served and libations would
be flowing. The only reporter who preferred to hear the Gerson presentation
was American Broadcasting Corporation newscaster Raymond Gram Swing.
During World War II, Mr. Swing had been a famous war correspondent on a
par with Edward R. Murrow. He attended and took copious notes at the Senate
press conference for use in his East Coast 6:00 P.M. ABC network broadcast of
Wednesday, July 3, 1946. Here is what Raymond Gram Swing broadcast then
throughout the United States:

“Thope I have my values right if, instead of talking tonight about the
agreement reached on Trieste by the Foreign Minister in Paris, or the con-
tinuing crisis of the OP A in Washington, or President Truman’s signing of the
Hobbs antiracketeering bill, I talk about a remarkable hearing before a Senate
Subcommittee in Washington yesterday on cancer and the need for cancer
research in new fields.

... A billis before Congress, the Pepper-Neely bill, to appropriate a
hundred million dollars for cancer research with something like the zeal
and bigness with which it went for the release of atomic energy, turning the
job over to the scientists with resources generous enough to solve the
problem.

This alone would make a good theme for a broadcast, just an example of the
use a great democracy can make of its intelligence and wealth. But the subject
has been made peculiarly gripping by unprecedented happenings yesterday
before the subcommittee which is holding hearings on this bill, and of which
Senator Pepper is chairman.
XX Preface

He invited a witness, a refugee scientist, now a resident of New York, Dr.
Max Gerson, and Dr. Gerson placed on the stand, in quick succession, five
patients. They were chosen to represent the principal prevailing types of
cancer, and in each instance they showed that the Gerson treatment had had
what is conservatively called “favorable effect on the course of the disease.”
That in itself is remarkable, but it is the more so because Dr. Gerson’s
treatment consists mainly of a diet which he has evolved after a lifetime of
research and experimentation. To say that Dr. Gerson has been curing cancer
by a dietary treatment is medically impermissible, for the reason that there
must be five years without recurrence before such a statement is allowed. Dr.
Gerson has cured tuberculosis and other illnesses with his diet, but in the
US.A. he has only been working on cancer for four and a half years. . . .

Yet anything that offers even a possibility of treating successfully at least
some of the four hundred thousand existing cancer cases in this country is
stirring news, no matter how conservatively it is formulated. There would
be no Pepper-Neely bill to appropriate a hundred million dollars for cancer
research if the existing research were coping with the need.

... [have spoken about this carefully and abstractly, which underplays some
of the shock and delight of the experience yesterday at the hearing of the
Pepper Committee. It is one thing to talk about chemistry and diet and
vitamins and other factors in medical science. It is another to see, as the
Comunittee yesterday saw, a seventeen-year-old girl, who had a tumor at the
base of the brain, which was inoperable, and which had paralyzed her.
Yesteday, she walked without assistance to the witness chair, and told clearly
about her case and her treatment.

There was a sturdy man, who had been a sergeant in the army. He had had
a malignant tumor, also at the base of the brain, which had been operated on
but needed deep X-ray treatment, and this he could not receive because of the
danger to the brain. Yesterday he was the picture of health as he testified, and
quite naturally he was proud of his remarkable recovery.

There was a woman who had had cancer of the breast which spread.
Yesterday she was well, and testified with poise and confidence.

A few cases showing such improvement cannot, of themselves, affect the
outlook of the medical profession. But they are attested facts and not flukes,
and as such they have to be accounted for. And there are many, many more
cases which could have been cited.

It would seem to be the business of medical research to leap on such facts
and carry every hopeful indication to a final conclusion. . . .

So the advocates for the Pepper-Neely bill can argue that, unless we
Preface xxi

learn now how to deal successfully with cancer, many millions of persons
now living in this country are condemned to die from cancer. A hundred.
million dollars is little more than a token payment for America to make, in
order to avert such a sweep of death, and they can then point to the
Gerson dietary approach as a most promising field of research. .. .

Dr. Gerson was an eminent if controversial figure in pre-Hitler Germany.
He was bound to be controversial because he was challenging established
practice in treating tuberculosis by diet. He has been assistant to Foerster,
the great neurologist of Breslau, and for years assistant to Sauerbruch, one of
the great physicians on the Continent. The Sauerbruch-Gerson diet for skin
tuberculosis is well-known to European medicine, and the account of it is
part of accepted medical literature. Dr. Gerson told the Pepper Committee
that he had first come upon his dietary theory in trying to cure himself of
migraine headaches. Later he treated others, among them a man with skin
tuberculosis as well. Dr. Gerson was an acknowledged dietary authority in
Weimar, Germany, and was responsible for the German army of his time
being placed on dehydrated, rather than canned food.2’

PUBLIC RESPONSE TO THE BROADCAST

Raymond Gram Swing continued with his network radio broadcast and
brought in some additional news too. After he ended, the telephone switch-
board lit up at the American Broadcasting Corporation in New York City.
People called in from all over the nation to learn about the Gerson Therapy. But
other, darker, more powerful commercial and political forces had been
listening as well.

The executive directors of pharmaceutical companies producing cytotoxic
agents for cancer treatment—members of the PMA~—threatened to cancel all
radio advertising contracts for their drugs sold over the counter, an annual loss
in revenue for ABC amounting to tens of millions of dollars. Within two weeks
of that fateful radio broadcast which apprised people of a potential cure for
cancer, after thirty years at the same job Raymond Gram Swing was fired from
his position as a newscaster for the ABC network.

You might also wish to know what happened to the Senate’s 227-page
Pepper-Neely anticancer bill of 1946—Document No. 89471. By efforts of the
lobbyists working with four senators who were also medical doctors, the bill
was defeated. Today, Document No. 89471 is stored in boxes and gathers dust
in the archives of the U.S. Government Printing Office.
Xxu Preface

Meanwhile, since the Pepper-Neely bill was buried, the number of people
getting cancer each year has worsened beyond what anyone could have
predicted. According to Reno, Nevada, oncologist, homeopath, and internal
medicine specialist W Douglas Brodie, M.D., HM.D., in his book Cancer and
Common Sense, the annual incidence of cancer has increased from 402,000 in
1946 to 1.9 million in 1996.2 Thus, during a half century since the defeat of
Senator Pepper's proposed anticancer legislation, the yearly occurrence of
cancer among the American populace has more than quadrupled? Worse still,
medical journalist and author Michael Culbert points out even more graphically
that at the stroke of midnight, upon our ringing in the twenty-first century,
every forty-five seconds thereafter a U.S. citizen is destined to die from cancer.
That number adds up to about 1,900 Americans per day.4

Oncologists informed about nutrition estimate that diets filled with fruits
and vegetables instead of fats and animal proteins —along with taking greater
amounts of exercise, more stringent weight control, and avoidance of cigarette
smoke—could reduce cancer incidence by up to 40 percent. This program
would amount to nearly 4 million fewer worldwide cases of malignancies per
year.
Thus, dietary and lifestyle improvements among Americans as advocated by
Dr. Max Gerson more than fifty years ago would be particularly effective as the
means to prevent occurrence of the four most frequently occurring life-
threatening malignancies in the United States. According to the November 30,
1998, issue of Newsweek magazine:>

1. Prostate cancer strikes with a minimum of 184,500 cases predicted in
1999. Among American men today, 17 percent will be diagnosed with
prostate cancer during their lifetimes. But improved diet, nutrition, and
general lifestyle would reduce that proportion to 13.6 percent.

2. Breast cancer hits with a minimum of 180,300 cases estimated for 1999.
Among American women today, 14 percent will be diagnosed with
breast cancer during their lifetimes. But improved diet, nutrition, and
general lifestyle would reduce that proportion to 7 percent.

3. Lung cancer happens with a minimum of 171,500 cases anticipated
for 1999. Among everyone in this country today, slightly
more than 7 percent will be diagnosed with lung cancer during
their lifetimes. Still, improved diet, nutrition, and general lifestyle
(especially eliminating exposure to tobacco smoke) would lower that
proportion to just 0.35 percent.
Preface xxm

4. Colon/rectal cancer shows up with a minimum of 95,600 cases expected in
1999. Among the populace of the United States, 6 percent will be
diagnosed with colon and/or rectal cancers during their lifetimes. But
improved diet, nutrition, and general lifestyle could reduce that
proportion to 1.5 percent.

“In spite of all the advances in chemotherapy and surgery,” report officials
of First Circle Medical, Inc., of Minneapolis, Minnesota, a main manufacturer of
antimalignancy hyperthermia equipment, “over 1,800,000 patients in North
America, Europe and Japan with disseminated lung, prostate, breast [cancer]
and melanoma die each year.”

As you read our book, three questions you may understandably raise are:

* Why didn’t the U.S. Senate over half a century ago adopt the anticancer
budgetary measure that came before it?

* Wasn't the prevention of or treatment for Americans coming down with
cancer vital enough?

¢ Why weren't anticancer experts requested to at least test the Ger- son
Therapy back then when senators were presented with the opportunity?

Finally, are you aware of the following additional, significant, estimated
statistic? Averaging between the numbers of United States residents getting
cancer in 1946 and those so victimized this year, it’s likely that 39,697,000
Americans could have been prevented from contracting the scourge or saved
from cancerous deaths. Application of the Gerson Therapy may have
accomplished that particular worthy undertaking. It can do it even now.

CHARLOTTE GERSON Bonita,
California Mori oN WALKER,
D.PM. Stamford,
Connecticut

References for the Preface

1. Gerson, M. A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases, 6th ed. Bonita, Calif:
The Gerson Institute, 1999.

2. Quoted in Dego, G. Doctor Max. The Story of Pioneering Physician Max
Gerson s Acclaimed Cancer Therapy and His Heroic Struggle to Change the
XXIV Preface

Way We Look at Health and Healing. Barrytown, N.Y.: Station Hill Press, 1997, pp.
513-516.

3. Brodie, W. D. Cancer and Common Sense: Combining Science and Nature to
Control Cancer. White Bear Lake, Minn.: Winning Publications, August 1997, p.
46.

4. Rugo, HS. “Cancer.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment 1997, 36th
ed, ed. by L.M. Tierney, S.J. McPhee, and M.A. Papadakis. Stamford, Conn.:
Appleton and Lange, 1997, p. 69.

5. Culbert, M. Medical Armageddon. San Diego, Calif: C and C Com
munications, 1995.

6. Cowley, G., with Underwood, A., Springen, K., and Davis, A. “Cancer
and diet: eating to beat the odds: what you need to know.” Newsweek,
November 30, 1998, pp. 60-66.

INTRODUCTION

he chief of medical oncology at the Strang Cancer Prevention Center in
New York City, Mitchell Gaynor, M.D., understood a lot about cancer
when he finished his cancer specialty training at Cornell Medical Center, but he
admits to knowing little about diet, nutrition, and their significance for
preventing and treating degenerative diseases. Cancer, a specific cluster of
body cells undergoing uncontrolled cell division and multiplication, is the
ultimate example of a degenerative disease in progress.

Dr. Gaynor was flabbergasted when he showed up at the prestigious
Rockefeller University in 1986, for a postdoctoral fellowship in molecular
biology, and found his more enlightened oncology colleagues buzzing about
the cancer-inhibiting qualities of brussels sprouts, cauliflower, cabbage, and
certain other cruciferous vegetables rich in the chemical called sulforaphane.
Sulforaphane boosts production of the body's phase II enzymes that cart off
dangerous residues of procarcinogens, those cancer- causing precursors
capable of damaging cellular DNA (see chapter 3 for details).

During that 1986 period, laboratory researchers had started discovering
dozens of new chemicals in common fruits and vegetables. In test tube and
animal studies, these obscure compounds were exhibiting a remarkable ability
to disrupt the formation of malignant and benign tumors. Today our
knowledge of such phytochemicals (compounds of plant origin) is exploding.
And as scientists learn more about the chemistry of plants and other edibles,
they are growing increasingly hopeful about
2 THE GERSON THERAPY

sparing people from being struck by malignancies. “We've seen the future,’
says Dr. Gaynor, “and the future is food.”

Although the significance of consuming nutritious, whole, and natural foods
for health and healing was originally developed and taught by Dr. Max Gerson
about sixty years ago, we have finally awakened to the truth of his teachings. It
is a reality that improvements in diet, nutrition, and general lifestyle are the
wave of the future for beating degenerative diseases of all types.

THE UNDERLYING NUTRITIONAL CONCEPT OF DR. MAX

GERSON

Dr. Gerson’s therapeutic program seeks to regenerate an ailing body and
bring it back to health by flooding the sick patient with nutrients and adopting
other modalities. The nutrients come from raw juices plus raw and cooked
solid organic vegetarian foods generously consumed. Inasmuch as the
underlying nutritional concept of Dr. Max Gerson—proven by clinical studies
cited in our text—is that an oxygen deficiency in the blood contributes to
degenerative diseases, his treatment invariably brings about a doubling of
circulatory oxygenation.

The Gerson Therapy also stimulates metabolism, eliminates toxins, and
restores sluggish waste-removal functions of a patient's liver and kidneys.
Thus, by using liberal amounts of high-quality nutrition, increasing the
patient's oxygen availability, reinvigorating the entire organism with a well-
functioning metabolism, and improving cellular detoxification, one’s
suppressed immune system, imperfect physiology, muddled mind, and
dysfunctional brain and other essential organs are encouraged to regenerate
toward homeostasis once again.

Dr. Gerson’s healing program is advantageous for overcoming nearly every
pathology and far superior to cancer chemotherapy. Statistically, for instance,
chemotherapy boasts an overall remission rate on average of 12 percent (7
percent for colon cancer and 1 percent for pancreatic cancer) for patients first
seen at early and intermediate stages of their illnesses, but the Gerson Therapy
offers remission success on average for up to 42 percent of its participating,
largely terminal cancer patients.

What's more, the Gerson Therapy nutrition program works permanently, in
a surer manner than all other known therapies, including cyto- toxicology
(chemotherapy), immunology, pharmacology, roentgenology (radiation
therapy), and other usual procedures provided by convention-
ally practiced allopathic medicine, since the goal of the Gerson Therapy is to
Introduction 3:

restore all essential organs.

SYNOPSIS OF THE GERSON THERAPY NUTRITION PROGRAM

Best represented by its dietary component, the Gerson Therapy recom-
mends a low-fat, salt-free program of food consumption to supply the body's
cells with easily assimilated nutrients for strengthening one’s natural immune
defenses. To prevent or correct most of the fifteen hundred known
degenerative diseases, the Gerson Therapy offers an ideal way to eat. In our
modern society of processed packaged foods frequently containing
preservatives, additives, dyes, and sometimes outright carcinogens, all forced
upon us by accompanying massive amounts of media propaganda and
advertising, the Gerson Therapy admittedly presents a difficult dining program
to follow. Yet if a sick person is serious about recovery, then adopting the
Gerson therapeutic technique does assure the restoration of wellness.

At the core of the Gerson Therapy is its diet, which includes organically
grown fresh fruits and vegetables and thirteen glasses of freshly squeezed
juices daily, taken at hourly intervals. The organic fresh fruits and vegetables
provide the patient with elevated levels of minerals, enzymes, beta carotene,
vitamins A and C, and other antioxidants that scavenge free radicals, as well as
naturally occurring phytochemicals that scientists have discovered are true
preventers of chronic degenerative diseases. These foods are recommended to
contain no residual pesticides and fungicides.

No meat is allowed. On the Gerson therapeutic program, all animal protein
is omitted for the person who is ill during the first six to twelve weeks of
treatment, and it’s kept to a minimum thereafter.”

The diet is largely fat-free but includes some nonfat and unflavored yogurt,
nonfat and unsalted pot cheese, cottage cheese, and churned buttermilk when
available (otherwise use nonfat yogurt), as well as flaxseed oil. Research put
forth by the seven-time Nobel prize candidate Johanna Budwig, Ph.D., of
Freudenstadt-Dietersweiler, Germany, shows that the omega-3 fatty acids in
flax kill human cancer cells in tissue cultures without destroying normal cells
in the same culture.?

Before Dr. Budwig published her groundbreaking w orks, Dr. Gerson, first in
Germany, then in Austria, and finally in the United States, was applying
nutritional knowledge he had gleaned about fats and oils for his patients’
illnesses. Today, the Gerson Therapy menu plan is being used by the American
Cancer Society (ACS). Yes, the very same ACS which once had condemned Dr.
Gerson and blacklisted his therapeutic diet. Moreover, the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) and the American Heart Association (AHA) both encourage the
4 THE GERSON THERAPY

use of a modified version of the Gerson eating program.

Believing cancer to be a systemic rather than a localized disease, as was an
erroneous but popular notion among health care professionals in the 1930s and
1940s, Dr. Gerson emphasized the rebalancing of a patient's entire physiology.
His writings indicate he intended that the therapy should reverse any
conditions sustaining the growth of malignant cells and restore those cells
dysfunctioning from other forms of pathology.

THE DETOXIFICATION COMPONENT

For the body detoxification component, Dr. Gerson employed coffee
enemas, which patients self-administer several times daily. Discussed in more
depth below (see chapters 12 and 13), the coffee enema enables cancer patients
and all others suffering from the life-threatening metabolic illnesses to
eliminate toxic breakdown products of rapidly dissolving tumor masses or
from the healing reactions of formerly dysfunctional cells generated by the
effects of the Gerson therapy. According to Dr. Gerson’s observations, there is a
risk, if coffee enemas are not applied in conjunction with the diet, juices and a
few supplements, that patients may succumb, not the disease process itself, but
rather as a result of the liver’s inability to detoxify rapidly enough.

Caffeine taken rectally stimulates the liver activity, increases bile flow, and
opens bile ducts so that the liver can excrete toxic waste more easily. Coffee
enemas are excellent for preventive medicine as well as for treatment. They
also bring about remarkable pain relief.4

As a further aid to detoxification and as part of the therapeutic component
involving food supplementation, Dr. Gerson’s procedures require the use of a
few orally self-administered dietary supplements every day or every other day.
Thyroid extract, potassium iodide, liver extract, pancreatic enzymes, and niacin
(nicotonic acid or vitamin B3) are employed.

TESTIMONY BEFORE THE UNITED STATES SENATE BY DR. MAX

GERSON
In our preface, we reprinted the unmodified text broadcasted by Raymond
Gram Swing in his American Broadcasting Corporation news program of
Wednesday, July 3, 1946, describing the appearance earlier that same day of
Max Gerson, M_D., before the Pepper-Neely subcommittee of the United States
Senate’s Foreign Relations Committee in Washington, D.C. Relative to this
description of his dietary treatment for cancer and other degenerative illnesses,
Introduction 5

what follows are the most pertinent portions of what Dr. Gerson stated during
his testimony:5

My office and residence is at 815 Park Avenue, New York City. I ama
member of the AMA, Medical Society of New York State, and Medical
Society of New York County.

The dietetic treatment, which has for many years been known as the
“Gerson diet,’ was developed first to relieve my own severe migraine con-
dition. Then it was successfully applied to patients with allergic conditions
such as asthma, as well as diseases of the intestinal tract and the liver-
pancreas apparatus. By chance a patient with lupus vulgaris (skin
tuberculosis) was cured following the use of the diet. After this success the
dietetic treatment was used in all other kinds of tuberculosis — bones,
kidneys, eyes, lungs, and so forth. It, too, was highly favorable in many
other chronic diseases, such as arthritis, heart disease, chronic sinusitis,
chronic ulcers, including colitis, high blood pressure, psoriasis, sclerosis
multiplex [multiple sclerosis], and so forth. The most striking results were
seen in the restoration of various kinds of liver and gall bladder diseases
which could not be influenced by other methods up to the present.

The great number of chronic diseases which responded to the dietetic
treatment showed clearly that the human body lost part of its resistance and
healing power, as it left the way of natural nutrition for generations.

The fundamental damage starts with the use of artificial fertilizer for
vegetables and fruits as well as for fodder. Thus, the chemically
transformed vegetarian and meat nourishment, increasing through gener-
ations, transforms the organs and functions of the human body in the wrong
direction.

Another basic defect lies in the waste of excrements of the cities. Instead
of returning the natural manure to the fruit-bearing soil, it is let into the
rivers, killing underwater life. The natural cycle is interrupted and mankind
has to suffer dearly for the violation. Life in forest and wilderness should
teach us the lesson.

But we can regain the lost defense and healing power if we return as
close as possible to the laws of nature as they are created. Highly concen-
trated for speedy reaction, they are laid down in the dietetic treatment.

The first cancer patient (bile ducts) was treated in 1928 with success.
Seven favorable cases followed out of twelve and remain free of symptoms
up to seven years.

My experience leads me to believe that the liver is the center of the
restoration process in those patients who improve strikingly. If the liver is
too far destroyed, then the treatment cannot be effective.

Aware of the imperfection of this as well as any other theory, I shall try,
6 THE GERSON THERAPY

nevertheless, to explain the end results of the Gerson diet. Itis condensed in
three surpassing components:

1. The elimination of toxins and poisons and returning of the displaced
“extracellular” Na (sodium)-group, connected with toxins, poisons, edema,
destructive inflammation from the tissues, tumors, and organs where it does
not belong, into the serum and tissues where it belongs — gall bladder with
the bile ducts, connective tissue, thyroid, stomach mucosa, kidney medulla,
tumors, and so forth.

2. Bringing back the lost intracellular K (potassium)-group combined
with vitamins, enzymes, ferments, sugar, and so forth, into the tissues and
organs where they belong: liver, muscles, heart, brain, kidney cortex, and so
forth; on this basis, iodine, ineffective before, is made effective, continuously
added in new amounts.

3. Restoring the differentiation, tonus, tension, oxidation, and so forth, by
activated iodine, where there were before growing tumors and metastases
with dedifferentiation, loss of tension, oxidation, loss of resistance, and
healing power.

In 1991, two decades following President Richard M. Nixon's confident
December 23, 1971, declaration of another “war on cance and his promise of a
cure by the 1976 Bicentennial, a group of sixty noted physicians and scientists
declared their disgust at the failures of the medical profession in general and
oncologists in particular. They called a press conference and made the
following statement: “The cancer establishment confuses the public with
repeated [false] claims that we are winning the war on cancer. . . . Our ability to
treat and cure most cancers has not materially improved.”

Rather, the best way to correct the cancer problem is through the application
of dietary improvements, nutrients, whole body detoxification, and overall
nutritional therapy. Some of these aspects of degenerative disease treatment are
what our next chapter introduces.

References for the Introduction

1. Cowley, G. with Underwood, A; Springen, K.; Davis, A. “Cancer and
diet: Eating to beat the odds: what you need to know.” Newsweek, November
30, 1998, pp. 60-66.

2. Walters, R. Options: The Alternative Cancer Therapy Book. Garden City Park,
N.Y.: Avery Publishing Group, 1992, pp. 189,190.

3. Budwig, J. Flax Oil as a True Aid against Arthritis, Heart Infarction, Cancer
and Other Diseases. Vancouver, B.C., Canada: Apple Publishing, 1994.

4. Moss, R.W. Cancer Therapy: The Independent Consumer's Guide to Non- Toxic
Treatment and Prevention New York: Equinox Press, 1992, p. 189.

5. Gerson, M. Testimony during hearings on Senate Bill 1875, conducted
Introduction 7

July 1, 2, 3, 1946 by Senator Claude Pepper (D-Florida), for the Pepper-Neely
Subcommittee of the Foreign Relations Committee, the 79th Congress of the
US. Senate, July 3, 1946.
Part One

HOW THE GERSON
THERAPY WORKS
Chapter One

HOW NUTRITION HEALS

L n 1992, at the Fukushima Medical College on the island of Hokkaido in
northern Japan, Professor of Medicine Yoshihiko Hoshino, M.D., Ph.D.,
learned that he had developed cancer of the colon. During the course of surgery
to remove the malignancy, his oncological surgeon discovered that Dr.
Hoshino’s cancer had already metastasized to the liver. While under
postoperative care, the patient was advised by his personal friend and former
classmate, the same surgical oncologist, to undergo multiple courses of
chemotherapy.

As it happens, the Gerson therapeutic program for reversing acute and
chronic degenerative diseases such as cancer, diabetes, stroke, arthritis, and
other life-threatening illnesses is quite well known and highly respected in the
industrialized countries of Europe and Asia. Professor Hoshino was among a
growing number of health professionals aware of Dr. Max Gerson’s well-
established book A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases (translated into
Japanese) and the medical efficacy of his treatment program.

Because of well-recognized adverse side effects and an excessive rate of
failure for colon/rectal cancer (93 percent of patients die after receiving
chemotherapy for such malignancy) and an even worse prognosis for liver
cancer metastases (97 percent of patients succumb after receiving chemo-
therapy), this professor of medicine refused to take cytotoxic agents. Instead,
owning the broadly disseminated Japanese translation of Dr.

Gerson’s book, Dr. Hoshino followed its instructions and on his own proceeded
to follow the Gerson Therapy.

Today, with a decent interval of almost nine years having elapsed since Dr.
Hoshino’s diagnosis, he and his oncologist have declared the patient “cured” of
12 THE GERSON THERAPY
both colon cancer and liver métastasés. Here is the letter Charlotte Gerson
recently received from Professor Yoshihiko Hoshino, M_D., Ph.D.:

As you know, I suffered fromcolon cancer and metastatic liver cancer in
1992 and recovered from them by use of the Gerson Therapy. I have written
a book introducing Gerson Therapy to medical consumers in Japan. My
book was published in August 1998 and is the first about Gerson Therapy
written by a medical doctor in Japan. It has caused a big sensation among
Japanese people, because using the Gerson program twelve additional
cancer patients also were cured. My book not only tells of my recovery but
also includes the stories of these twelve Japanese who no longer suffer from
cancer.

HEALING BY A POWERFUL NUTRITIONAL THERAPY

In applying the techniques of healing, all health practitioners acknowledge a
common truth: there exists just one science of human immunology, which
possesses specific laws of biochemistry. In the profession of medicine, however,
two opposing factions or principles of practice contend with one another.
Disease-oriented orthodox medicine and patient- centered holistic medicine
agree only on the current facts of biochemistry and immunology but hardly on
anything else.

Disease-oniented medical practice directs its efforts to finding the generalized
formulas for treating types or classes of people with similar symptoms.
Classification of patients into groups or categories is indispensable for finding a
treatment. In order to uncover the therapy that works best, single- or double-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials are frequently employed. Whatever is
found wrong with a patient's physiology, the allopathic (drug-using) physician
attempts to correct the health problem with FDA-approved pharmaceuticals,
chemotherapeutics, surgery, immunotherapy, radiation therapy, or other forms
of high technology. Disease-oriented medicine is a system primarily employing
drugs in an attempt to produce effects in the body that will directly oppose and
so alleviate the symptoms of disease. Applying chemotherapy for cancer is the
perfect example of disease-oriented medicine in practice.1

Patient-centered medical practice develops its healing procedures by seeking
out everything that can possibly be done to optimize the health of a given
unique individual An orientation like this, also defined as “functional
medicine” by health professional educator Jeffrey Bland, Ph.D., of Gig Harbor,
Washington, demands decisions based on judgments by holistic physicians,
chiropractors, homeopaths, naturopaths, acupuncturists, some nurse
practitioners, nutritionists, and other types of healers. It also requires close
personal participation by the patients themselves. The doctor frequently
devotes as much time teaching a patient as administering treatment. Even if the
How Nutrition Heals 13
patient has only subclinical symptoms, as manifested by irregular laboratory
tests, an effort is made in patient-centered medicine to accomplish three specific
physiological responses:

1. Harmonize the person's biochemistry.
2. Elevate the workings of a suppressed immume system.
3. Correct the malfunctioning of essential organs.

Prescribing the right homeopathic remedy is a perfect example of patient-
centered medicine in practice.”

The Gerson Therapy is another example of how one might put to use patient-
centered medicine. It is the best in self-help health care, especially for the
reversal of really serious degenerative illnesses. The Gerson Therapy mostly
utilizes nutrition to achieve all three components of holistic, biological, patient-
oriented medicine. It is the ultimate in natural healing and a powerful antidote
to the highly unnatural lifestyle that prevails in all modern industrial societies.

In the following sections of this chapter, we offer a general discussion of the
pathological changes within the tissues and cells typically present in cancer.
And the description of such alterations from normal physiology will offer
insights into abnormalities present in some of the other degenerative diseases.

Since he first introduced it around 1926, there has been no place in the
allopathic medical community for Dr. Max Gerson’s powerfully healing
nutritional therapy. For instance, among the four deciding votes cast by
legislators to defeat the U.S. Senate’s 1946 Pepper-Neely anticancer Bill No.
1875, those voting negatively were four physicians turned senators. At the time,
treating people with diet to eliminate their degenerative diseases was just too
excessively simple. Doing so removed a great deal of decision-making power
from the medical profession; consequently, those four physicians who were U.S.
senators at the time voted to kill Senator Claude Pepper's bill. So cancer patients
then and later became victims of the shortsighted vote for special interests.

Dr. Gerson plodded on and continued bringing sick people who consulted
him back from the brink of death. Now, with the pioneer gone these past forty
years or more, his daughter and the Gerson Institute carry on with their task of
educating the public.

THE GERSON THERAPY IS DE FACTO RECOGNIZED BY THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT

As we alluded to in our introduction, the most revolutionary and promising
field of medical research against degenerative diseases is that of
chemoprevention: the use of micronutrients or macronutrients, phytochemicals,
mutraceuticals, and other organic components often found in foods that can
14 THE GERSON THERAPY

prevent, stop, or retard the process of illness. By the beginning of 1995, the
National Cancer Institute was pursuing forty new or established studies in the
area of nutrition that involved enzymes, fiber, fat, micronutrients, vitamins, and
phytochemicals.

By 1999, the forty abstracts summarizing those same 1995 beginning
investigations on cancer and nutrition had been completed and sent to the US.
government's American Association for Cancer Research. These studies are
currently providing critical information on the substances needed to be added
to or eliminated from the human diet to combat cancer. You probably are not
surprised that nearly all of the components of the Gerson Therapy do play
leading roles among these phytochemical ingredients. By such adoption, the
Gerson Therapy is, in effect, recognized as a viable treatment against cancer and
most other degenerative diseases. It’s a de facto recognition by the United
States, but without lawful authority and literally unofficial. Still, the Gerson
Therapy's components are very much in evidence and being utilized to save
lives. They even form the foundation for advisories given by profit makers of
the cancer industry such as the American Cancer Society, the National Cancer
Institute, the Sloan-Kettering Cancer Clinic, and many pharmaceutical
companies merging nutrient manufacturers into their corporate structures.
How Nutrition Heals 15

As part of our preface we stated that in the United States every year, a
minimum of 1.9 million people are diagnosed with some type of malignancy
(excluding skin cancer and in situ cervical cancer). And we cited holistic
oncologist, internist, and homeopathic physician W. Douglas Brodie, M_D.,
H.MLD., of Reno, Nevada, who states that at least 700,000 Americans die from
cancer annually.

Almost every health care professional and most medical consumers now
know that the cause of over 70 percent of malignancies is in some way related to
what we eat. Denatured food, in fact, is a main source of breast and colon/rectal
cancer as well as of lung cancer in nonsmokers. Every year more medical and
scientific evidence accumulates revealing that what we take in as food has
tremendous influence on whether we will develop cancer and whether we can
cure it once malignant disease symptoms arise.3

This is a tremendously exciting field of scientific inquiry that the con-
ventional medical community is just now beginning to investigate seriously.
Yet, probably half a century ahead of his time, during an active professional life
spanning forty years, from 1919 in Bielefeld, Germany, to
1959 in New York City, one modest physician developed the food and nu-
trition answers for cancer and other degenerative diseases. Max Gerson, M.D.,
however, was unmercifully vilified, harassed, and persecuted in the United
States by the AMA, especially its journal editor, Morris Fishbein, M.D., and his
physician-politician cohorts.4

After a 1946 patient demonstration before a committee of the U.S. Senate that
received national media attention, Dr. Gerson was attacked editorially in the
pages of the journal of the American Medical Association (/ AMA). Reasons for the
attack were related to prevailing domestic medical politics and the various
financial policies being enforced at the time by longtime AMA politician,
/ AMA editor, and nonpracticing physician Morris Fishbein, M.D.

Why has it taken organized allopathic medicine so long to appreciate the
connection between diet and cancer?

Why have oncological pioneers like Dr. Max Gerson been denigrated, been
stigmatized, and had their hearts broken when they've attempted to use
nutrition as a therapeutic tool?

At least for the first of these penetrating questions, the authors of this book
can figure out four particular answers:

1. In the United States, advances in medical technology maintain
prejudicial leads over any other means of treatment. As a nation
we have tended to focus on technology for battling cancer and other
health problems. Eating vegetables as recommended by Dr. Gerson
employs hardly any technology.

2. The American pharmaceutical industry rules the way medicine is
allowed to be practiced not only in this country but also around the
16 THE GERSON THERAPY

3. world. If a therapeutic substance or method is unpatentable— without
profits to be made from a synthesized drug—it’s usually ignored or
opposed and suppressed. No medically oriented commercial company
will be amenable to investing research time and money to promote it.

4. Admitting that there’s a strong relationship between what we eat and
getting cancer or some other sickness, points a self-directed finger at
two groups: (a) the food processors who sell us malnourishing synthetic
or otherwise unnatural packaged edibles and (b) ourselves as the source
of our own illness. Although we may recognize the truth of such
condemnation, it truly is a discomforting mental burden nonetheless.>

5. Most medical doctors have had extremely poor education in the
nutritional sciences. Those physicians who currently utilize nutrition as
treatment are primarily self-educated.

There has been no place for the Dr. Gersons of this world —until now. Today
the medical times are changing remarkably for doctors —not only financially but
also nutritionally. The more conscientious of them have found it necessary to
turn to nutritional therapy almost as a last resort against cancer, arthritis, heart
and blood vessel disorders, diabetes, stroke, and other disabling forms of
degenerative diseases. Why? Simply because too many of their patients never
get well with the applications of standard, conventionally practiced allopathic
medicine and oncology. Gradually, physicians are looking at the true causes of
debilitating diseases like cancer and deciding that for too long they've been
treating symptoms and not the underlying sources of illness, which they didn’t
understand.

THE VARIOUS FORMS OF CANCEROUS GROWTHS

Of the 150 different types of cancerous growths, five major groups are
conventionally recognized in oncology (the study and practice of tumor
treatment). They are classified in accordance with the tissues exhibiting an
abnormally wild and excessive cellular growth. The classifications listed below
are taken from the book An Alternative Medicine Defimtive Guide to Cancer,
coauthored by W. John Diamond, M_D., director of the Triad Medical Center in
Reno, Nevada, and cardiologist W. Lee Cowden, MD., consultant to the
Conservative Medicine Institute in Richardson, Texas, with contributor Burton
Goldberg, publisher for Future Medicine Publishing, Inc.°

Carcinomas form in the epithelial cells that cover the skin, mouth, nose,
throat, lung airways, and genitourinary and gastrointestinal tracts or that line
glands such as the breast or thyroid. Solid tumors invading the lung, breast,
How Nutrition Heals 17
prostate, skin, stomach, and colon/rectum are labeled carcinomas.

Sarcomas develop in the bones and soft connective and supportive tissues
surrounding organs and tissues, such as cartilage, muscles, tendons, fat, and the
other linings of the lungs, abdomen, heart, central nervous system, and blood
vessels.

Leukermas evolve in the blood and bone marrow. Abnormal white blood cells
produced in those tissues travel throughout the bloodstream damaging the
spleen and other tissues. They don’t form solid tumors but rather are
considered blood dyscrasias (imbalances).

Lymphomas are lymph gland malignancies composed of abnormal white
blood cells (lymphocytes) congregating in the neck, groin, armpits, spleen, chest
center, and around the intestines as solid tumors. Two of the most prevalent
lymphoma types affecting North Americans are non- Hodgkin's lymphoma and
Hodgkin’s disease.

Myelomas, while rare, arise in the antibody-producing plasma cells or blood-
cell-producing (hemopoietic) cells of the bone marrow.

Cancer cells are essentially parasitic and immortal. They fail to develop
specialized functions, develop their own blood vessel network to siphon
nourishment away from the normal cells, and grow to such a state of ab-
normality that they kill their host. Cancer cells are not encapsulated by fiber and
thus may invade nearby normal cells. If they do not invade, the cancerous
growth/is considered to be localized; if they spread to other body parts, the
malignancy is labeled metastasized.

WHY CANCER AND OTHER BoDyY DEGENERATIONS ARISE

In 1958, Max Gerson, M_D., was the first physician ever to state that cancer
was caused by multiple interdependent factors. He had identified several such
factors during his forty-one-year career as a physician. Now, after another forty-
one years, the original list offered by Dr. Gerson has expanded. Environmental
polluters have been releasing into the air, soil and water myriad new cancer-
causing agents (at last count over 52,000 substances), thus creating new ways to
suppress people’s immunity and inhibit the enzymes necessary to our life
processes. Today, a minimum of forty-nine stressors exist, which contribute to
acute or chronic physical, mental, and emotional deterioration (see Table 1-1 on
pages 19-20).

Although Dr. Gerson was the first to identify some of these stressors, his
insights have been consistently ignored by conventional oncologists. Patients
coming under their care inevitably suffer as a result. Incorrect allopathic cancer
treatments have been employed for almost a half century to attack tumors
18 THE GERSON THERAPY

without correcting the underlying causes that stimulate their development.

THE MULTIPLE "HITS” OF PRECURSOR CARCINOGENS

While the potential of forty-nine (or more) cancer-causing precursors exists,
if an individual avoids being “hit’ by most of them it’s possible that
symptomatic cancer won't develop in his or her lifetime. However, since one
out of three (approaching one out of two) North Americans or Europeans do
currently come down with cancer, the odds are high that malignancy in some
form will strike you or a loved one.

According to the multiple-lut theory, all cancers arise from at least two
changes or “hits” to cellular genes. These double hits build up and interact over
time. Eventually, a breaking point is reached (the proverbial “straw that broke
the camel's back’) and cancerous growth is switched on. The hits will likely
come from one of the precursor carcinogens we have cited in Table 1-1.

Most critical are the number and types of carcinogenic hits, their frequency,
and their intensity. Some of the carcinogen hits are cancer “initiators” while
others are cancer “promoters.’”4
How Nutrition Heals 19
TABLE 1-1

Everyday Factors That Contribute to the Rise of Cancer

Taken from the medical, scientific, and environmental literature as well as from
our everyday experiences, here is the coauthors’ listing of forty-nine
predisposing ceaseless, contributing factors as one or more sources of cancer
affecting the human body's’ ever-weakening enzymatic, hormonal,
immunological, and other defense systems:

Atmospheric cosmic rays and X rays
Sunlight’s ultraviolet rays

Chronic electromagnetic field exposure
Geopathic stress

Sick building syndrome

lonizing radiation

Microwave oven radiation

Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation from domestic appliances
9. Overhead power lines

10. Nuclear radiation

11. Pesticide/herbicide residues

12. Industrial toxins

13. Drinking or bathing in polluted water
14. Drinking or bathing in chlorinated water
415. Drinking or bathing in fluoridated water
16. Tobacco and smoking

17. Hormonal therapies

18. Immune-suppressive drugs

19. Consuming irradiated foods

20. Ingesting food additives

21. Mercury toxicity from any source

22. Toxic metal syndrome

23. Dental amalgam fillings

24. Dental root canals

25. Dental cavitations (jawbone spaces left by poor tooth extraction)
26. Dental metals of all types

27. Steady use of street drugs

28. Steady use of prescription drugs

29. Steady use of nonprescription drugs
30. Nerve interference fields

31. Dietor nutritional deficiencies

32. Consumption of synthetic "nonfoods”
33. Chronic physical or mental stress

34. Destructive negative emotions

35. Depressed thyroid action

36. Intestinal toxicity or digestive impairment
37. Parasites

ONOOARWNHE
20 THE GERSON THERAPY

TABLE 1-1 (cont.)
38. Viruses

39. Bacterial infections

40. Fungal infections

41. Blocked detoxification pathways

42. Free radical pathology

43. Cellular oxygen deficiency

44. Adverse cellular terrain

45. Oncogenes (cellular genes that change normal cells into cancer)
46. Genetic predisposition

47. Miasm (energy residues of previous illnesses)
48. Physical irritants, e.g, asbestos

49. Alcohol consumption

Any of the precursor carcinogens (often referred to by oncologists as
procarcinogens) can be a tumor initiator or a promoter. Potentially cancerous
changes begin in a damaged cell’s DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) after the
second devastating procarcinogenic hit. Uncontrolled growth in a damaged cell
follows in due course, progressing to an eventually noticeable malignant lesion
with a mass or tumor that may invade other tissues.

In the first step toward cancer development, initiation, the procarcinogenic
hit may produce large numbers of toxic agents, known as free radicals, which set
up a pathological process that damages the cell’s DNA when the liver sets up
an enzymatic reaction known as Phase One. This reaction causes the
procarcinogen to convert into a full-fledged carcinogen. Additionally, the liver
produces Phase Two enzymes to cart off the dangerous residue that Phase One
enzymes leave behind. The liver plays a vital role in the process of cancer
formation, simultaneously initiating carcinogenesis and neutralizing it.

In the second step toward cancer formation, promotion, the liver’s neu-
tralization may not be up to par and a damaged cell alters its pattern of mitosis
(normal cell division). It begins to divide voluminously. That is when the
immune system goes to work, recognizing these cells as foreign and destroying
them; if it fails, however, the damaged cell can spawn a tumorous lesion.

In the third step toward a full-blown cancer, progression, the tumor attempts
to build itself a blood supply for sustained nourishment. Then tumorous
invasion of surrounding tissues may take place. Clusters of cancer cells tend to
release certain essential growth factors that promote this de-

How Nutrition Heals TABLE 1-2
Health Problems Successfully Treated by the Gerson Therapy 21

1. Acne 27. Hepatitis

2 Addictions 28. High blood pressure
3. AIDS 29. Hyperactivity

4. Allergies 30. Hypoglycemia/hyperglycemia
5.  Anemias 31. Immune deficiency

6. Ankylosing spondylitis 32. Infertility

7 Arthritis 33. Intestinal parasites
8. Asthma 34. Kidney disease

9. Cancers and leukemias 35. Liver cirrhosis

10. Candidiasis 36. Lyme disease

11. Chemical sensitivities 37. Lupus erythematosus
12. Chronic fatigue syndrome 38. Macular degeneration
13. Constipation 39. Migraine

14. Crohn's disease 40. Mononucleosis

15. Cushing's syndrome 41. Multiple sclerosis

16. Depression/panic attacks 42. Obesity

17. Diabetes 43. Ocular histoplasmosis
18. Emphysema 44, Osteomyelitis

19. Endometriosis 45. Osteoporosis

20. Epilepsy 46. Phiebitis

21. Fibroids 47. Premenstrual syndrome
22. Fibromyalgia 48. Psoriasis

23. Genital herpes 49. Shingles

24. Gout 50. Stroke

25. Heart and artery diseases 51. Tuberculosis

26. Hemorrhoids 52. Ulcerative colitis

velopment of new blood vessels, called angiogenesis, so that malignant invasion
of surrounding tissue may then take place.°

THE GERSON DIETARY THERAPY FOR FIFTY TWO ILLNESSES

Each of the factors listed in Table 1-1 that can contribute to cancer or other
acute and chronic debilitating illnesses may be successfully prevented or treated
with dietary intervention. Certain foods fight off cancer and other degenerative
diseases or bring about their physiological reversal. Every food component
incorporated into the Gerson Therapy is effective against a great variety of
physical and mental pathological conditions.

To date, nearly ten thousand patients have benefited from the Gerson dietary
treatment. Many of these success stories are described in the Gerson Institute’s
bimonthly Gerson Healing Newsletter. Table 1-2 shows a sample of the several
hundred health problems against which the Gerson Therapy has shown
verified, permanent effectiveness:
22 THE GERSON THERAPY

References for Chapter One

1. Baker, S.M. Detoxification and Healing The Key to Optimal Health, New
Canaan, Conn.: Keats Publishing, 1997, p. 157.

2. Ihd., p. 158.

3: Diamond, WJ.; Cowden, W. Lee. With Goldberg, B. An Alternative
Medicine Definitive Guide to Cancer. Tiburon, Calif.: Future Medicine Publishing,
Inc., 1997, pp. 518, 519.

4. Dollinger, M.; Rosenbaum, E.H.; Cable, G. Everyone’s Guide to Cancer
Therapy. How Cancer Is Diagnosed, Treated, and Managed Day to Day. 3rd edition.
Kansas City, MO.: Andrews McMeel Publishing, 1997, pp. 6, 7.

5. Op. cit, An Alternative Medicine Definitive Guide to Cancer

6. Cowley, G. with Underwood, A; Springen, K.; Davis, A. “Cancer and
diet: Eating to beat the odds: what you need to know.” Newsweek, November
30, 1998, pp. 60-66.

Chapter Two

Joe}

A BRIEF BIOGRAPHY OF DR.
MAX GERSON

M ax Gerson was born in Wongrowitz, Germany, on October 18, 1881. He
was the third child and second boy in a German-Jewish family of nine healthy
children. Early on, he exhibited an inquiring mind. For instance, when Max was
six and a half years old, he wondered what would happen if the fertilizers were
changed in the flowerbeds of his mother’s garden, and he therefore carried out
experiments. The lad’s crude attempts at soil alterations generally resulted in
the death of her flowers so, naturally, his mother quickly stopped Max's
curiosity as to changing her plants’ soil nutrition.

When the young man was ready to graduate from high school (called
Gymnasium in Germany), it was required that all students pass a written
mathematics examination. Max's graduation test contained a math problem of a
type that he did not remember ever having seen. Yet he proceeded to set up an
equation and find an answer to this very difficult problem His teacher had
never before seen such an intricate solution and couldn't judge it to be right or
wrong. For a determination, the student's paper needed to be sent to a famous
mathematics professor teaching at the University of Berlin. The answer came
back that Max had produced an entirely new and original solution; that here
was a mathematical genius, and the young man should absolutely study
mathematics.

Upon his graduation from Gymnasium, a family council was called, and
Max's future was placed before his parents and siblings. Noting that there was
no Jewish mathematics professor throughout Germany, it was agreed
24 THE GERSON THERAPY

that, should Max study mathematics, he would never be more than a simple
high school math teacher. Everyone—including the new graduate himself—
agreed that he should study medicine instead.

EDUCATION OF A HEALER

Max Gerson attended the universities of Breslau, Wuerzburg, Berlin, and
Freiburg for his medical studies. In 1907, he completed his internship in
Hoechst, Main, and subsequently worked as an assistant to Professor Albert
Frankel, M_D., in Berlin. From 1909 until the beginning of the First World War,
he worked in Berlin in the Friedrichshain Hospital with Professor Kronig and
Professor Borottau, and for a short period at the children’s clinic with Professor
Minkowsky.

As a captain in the German Army Medical Corps, Dr. Gerson was a close
associate for almost half a decade of the prominent neurosurgeon Ottfried
Foerster, M_D. In 1928, ten years after establishing his own practice in Bielefeld
in 1919, Dr. Gerson treated three hopelessly ill people suffering with cancer.
One of them was dying from inoperable stomach cancer. Even surprising the
diet’s developer, all three recovered and went on to tell numerous other cancer
patients that successful treatment was at hand. Still, because Dr. Gerson
recognized that some degenerative disease patients would recover and some
would not, he was careful as to whom he gave the Gerson Therapy in the next
ten years.

In 1933, barely escaping from capture and imprisonment in a Nazi death
camp because he was Jewish, Dr. Gerson moved his family first to Vienna,
Austria, where he completed his book on tuberculosis. In 1938, he was able to
emigrate with his family to New York City. He passed the New York State
board examinations for medicine and opened a medical practice on Park
Avenue. He continued to develop his therapy to achieve success with all types
of serious health difficulties, especially cancer. The physician treated hundreds
of patients given up to die after receiving surgery and radiation (chemotherapy
had not yet been invented). After these years of study and research, the Gerson
Therapy brought really sick people up to a 50 percent rate of recovery for even
far advanced cancer cases. (After chemotherapy was introduced into oncology,
Dr. Gerson’s natural healing success rate in patients thus treated was reduced.)

In 1946, Dr. Gerson became the first physician to demonstrate recovered
cancer patients before a United States Senate committee, which was holding
A Brief Biography of Dr. Max Gerson 25

hearings on a bill to find means of curing and preventing cancer under the
sponsorship of Senator Claude Pepper. The American Medical Association's
lobbyists who supported surgery, radiation, and chemotherapies were too well
financed, however, and they caused the Senate bill’s defeat by four votes. If it
had passed, this Senate bill would have supported extensive research into the
Gerson Therapy and could have spread this cure for cancer in 1946.

PHYSICIAN, HEAL THYSELF: GERSON S FIRST DISCOVERIES

While he was a university student, Max Gerson was plagued by a major
health problem: he suffered from exceedingly severe migraine headaches,
which continued throughout his undergraduate years.

By the time Max was a medical resident, these headaches were so disabling
and frequent that he sometimes spent three days a week in a darkened room,
experiencing nausea, vomiting, eye sensitivity, and awful one-sided head pain
which felt as though his cranium were splitting in two. He sought counsel from
his medical professors only to find that they couldn’t help in any way. Rather,
they advised him “to learn to live with it” The young physician felt he couldn't
accept such suffering and would have to find an answer for himself.

Max embarked upon a search. He read numerous books and medical papers
and consulted with many authorities, but found no direction. Finally he came
upon a case report in an Italian medical journal about a woman who had
suffered from migraines and found relief by changing her diet. No details were
given, but the idea made sense to Dr. Gerson. The severe spasms with nausea
and vomiting that were affecting him, the young doctor concluded, could well
be caused by some foods he was unable to digest. Now he had to discover what
they were.

His first thought was that every baby can digest cow’s milk; his body should
be able to handle it as well. Therefore, he lived on nothing but milk for the next
ten days. His migraines nevertheless showed no improvement—no change
whatsoever. Then it occurred to him that animals never drink milk once they
are weaned. Moreover, a human’s physical structure is similar to that of
vegetarian animals. This being true, Max's thinking went, people with health
problems should probably live on fruit, vegetables, and grainy.

He tried an all-apple diet—raw and baked apples, applesauce, apple juice,
apple compote —and he became well, with no migraines. Slowly
69 THE GERSON THERAPY

thereafter, one food following another, he added other edibles. If something
eaten wasn’t right for his body, it could cause him a sensitivity reaction, taking
the form of migraine in as little as twenty minutes.

GERSON’S “MIGRAINE DIET"

When he experienced further sensitivity problems from consuming cooked
foods, Dr. Gerson hypothesized that the culprit was not the cooking process but
rather the addition of salt. Upon his eliminating salt from his diet, Max was
able to eat not only cooked foods but also any kind of vegetables, potatoes,
grains, and so on. He named this new program of eating, which kept him free
of head pain disturbances, his “migraine diet.” It was predicated on the
ingestion of fresh fruits and vegetables, mostly raw but some cooked, and
totally free of salt. Gerson decided that salt was the source of pathology
connected with diet.

In time, patients would come to him complaining of migraines. Although
there was no cure according to the textbooks, Gerson revealed that he had been
suffering from migraines himself until he had developed and followed his
antimigraine, saltless diet.

The young physician would then suggest that the patient try it out.
Invariably, migraine patients following his eating program would return for a
follow-up consultation and report that they were free of headaches as long as
they didn’t “cheat” on the Gerson eating program When they began eating salt
again, they would suffer a relapse.

Skin Tuberculosis Is Eliminated

by the Gerson Therapy

One of Dr. Gerson’s patients returned after remaining on the antimigraine
diet for a short period and reported that his skin tuberculosis, known medically
as lupus vulgaris, had disappeared along with his migraines. The new
practitioner told his patient that lupus was an “incurable” disease and that the
skin problem must have come from something else. This hipus vulgaris patient,
however, possessed bacteriological studies proving his diagnosis. Thus, for the
first time in the history of medicine, Dr. Gerson saw skin tuberculosis healing
from treatment.
70 THE GERSON THERAPY

In light of the patient's diagnostic reports, the young doctor could hardly
believe his eyes, but he soon became convinced that his migraine diet was
helpful in the treatment of tubercular skin disease. He asked the patient
A Brief Biography of Dr. Max Gerson 27

if he knew others suffering from the same problem. Yes, the patient replied,
and he sent Dr. Gerson some of his tubercular friends from the hospital where
he had been confined. After some weeks elapsed, these tuberculosis patients
also recovered on Dr. Gerson’s antimigraine eating plan.

News of Dr. Gerson’s success with lupus vulgaris came to the attention of
Professor Ferdinand Sauerbruch, M.D., the world-famous lung tuberculosis
specialist who practiced in Munich. After conducting long discussions on
dietary concepts with Dr. Gerson, Prof. Sauerbruch decided to set up a clinical
trial using the Gerson Therapy. During an extended period, the professor
treated 450 “incurable” skin tuberculosis patients using Dr. Gerson’s method.
Of these subjects, 446 recovered fully; Dr. Sauerbruch was deeply impressed.
The renowned lung specialist reports on this successful Gerson dietary trial and
its positive results in his autobiography, Master Surgeon.

Dr. Gerson was not satisfied to let the situation rest there. He reasoned that
if lupus vulgaris could be healed with diet, why not other forms of tu
berculosis, such as lung, kidney, or bone TB? He started to treat such cases and
found that they too responded to the dietary therapy and were cured.

One of the lung TB cases was Albert Schweitzer’s wife, Helene, who had
contracted tuberculosis at an early age in the tropics and was in terminal
condition when she was brought to see Dr. Gerson by her husband. Mrs.
Schweitzer recovered from her disease completely and went on to live well into
her eighties.

During the course of treating these various migraine and tuberculosis cases,
Dr. Gerson found that many of the patients had been suffering from other
problems, too: high blood pressure, asthma, allergies, kidney damage, arthritis,
residual stroke, hardening of the arteries, and more. These acute or chronic
degenerations also disappeared. Unquestionably, the Gerson Therapy worked
toward correcting almost any degenerating illness.

Thus, Dr. Gerson recognized that he was no longer treating a disease; he
was helping the body to heal itself of nearly all dysfunctions. Of course, this
meant that he was no longer treating symptoms but the patient’s underlying
problem; he was taking a completely different direction from the usual
approach of orthodox medicine: the suppression of symptoms.

Sodium/P otassium Balance as a Metabolic Healing
Procedure

In the course of his work with tuberculosis patients, Dr. Gerson realized that
one of the basic problems of disease was the loss of potassium from tissue cells
and the penetration of sodium into the cells (known in medicine as tissue
28 THE GERSON THERAPY

damage syndrome or TDS). The cell, in attempting to maintain its integrity,
binds the toxic sodium material with water. Such a circumstance for the sick
patient is recognized as edenutous fluid retention

Six years after Dr. Gerson’s death, a medical textbook coauthored by
Malcolm Dixon and Edwin C. Webb titled Enzymes ( Academic Press, 1964) gave
further evidence of the problems caused by sodium penetration. The book
confirmed Dr. Gerson’s initial findings. These two authors studied how the
body builds enzymes, and they reported that, in most cases, potassium behaves
like a catalyst (an activating substance) in the formation of enzymes. Sodium,
on the other hand, usually acts as an inhibitor, or blocking substance. Thus,
with the penetration of sodium into the cell, and therefore into tissues, enzyme
function is inhibited and the normal tissue activity becomes disturbed or at
worst, blocked.

While a minimum of sodium is needed by the body for normal function, this
inorganic substance is also considered to be an extracellular mineral, since it
must remain outside of body cells in their fluids. Potassium is the intracellular
mineral, since it is needed for metabolism within body cells. When the
extracellular/intracellular balance is disturbed, health problems start from
damage to the cells. In normal vegetarian nutrition, plant material of all kinds
contains quite adequate amounts of sodium to satisfy our needs. The problem
is that, in the course of canning, bottling, preserving, freezing, and all other
forms of food processing, as well as during the usual procedure of cooking,
potassium is depleted and salt (sodium chloride) is invariably added to foods.
Additions like these constitute an excess. The body is normally able to excrete
excess sodium through the kidneys and feces, but when it becomes
overwhelmed daily, year after year, with huge amounts of excess sodium, there
comes a point when the body’s ability to excrete this excess is reduced or lost.
Now a person’s many enzyme systems, his or her immune system, and
eventually the liver, are damaged. The result is symptoms of illness and the
creation of disease dysfunction.

As we observed earlier, the first thing Dr. Gerson did was to eliminate all
added salt (sodium) from his own and his patients’ diet. He then added to the
patients’ salt-free vegetarian diet a freshly pressed glass of organic vegetable
juice taken hourly, thirteen times a day. Additionally, the doctor examined his
patients’ urine and found that during the first week on this treatment they
often excreted from 6 to 8 grams of sodium in a day even on a sodium-free diet!

Following this salt-free program, the participating patients’ ankles and legs
lost their swelling (edema) and became normal once again; moreover,
overabundant abdominal fluid (ascites) decreased as well. The patients ridding
A Brief Biography of Dr. Max Gerson 29

themselves of so much burdensome fluid invariably excreted a great deal of
urine. Restoring the body's sodium/ potassium tissue balance for his patients
became one of Dr. Gerson’s key metabolic healing procedures. (Please see
chapter 10 on the Gerson saltless diet for more detailed information about the
human body’s sodium/ potassium balance.)

OUTSIDE STRESSORS AND DISEASE

Dr. Gerson discovered that more difficulties with illness develop as well
from outside stressors, before the body's defenses break down. For example,
foods are raised in soil containing artificial fertilizers providing only the three
particular minerals: nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium (symbolized by the
initials N, I’ and K). But normal plants require something like fifty-two
different chemicals for good health and strong growth. Artificially fertilized
soil, as is employed in truck farming, brings nutritional deficiency to the plants
growing on it. People, too, require these fifty-two minerals to be present in
foods. When they are not contained in the soil and thus not in our foods, we
become deficient in the same way that our plants are lacking.

Furthermore, plants, just like people, experience deficiency diseases and lose
their defenses. Then, fungal or viral diseases and insects move in to destroy
such weak and deficient plants, and farmers are forced to spray them with
fungicides, herbicides, and pesticides to avoid losing their crops. Thus, in
agriculture worldwide, deficient and toxic commercially raised foods cause
peoples’ bodies to become deficient, weakened, toxic, and finally diseased.

With this basic understanding as taught by Dr. Gerson, we may be able to
see how health breaks down. And this description of soil and plants does not
include additional damage we inflict on ourselves with cigarettes, alcohol,
antibiotics, sleeping pills, pesticides, fungicides, herbicides, over-the-counter
and doctor-prescribed drugs, and much more (see chapter 1). It becomes clear
that, in order to reverse disease and restore health, we need to detoxify and
intensively flood the body with live, fresh, active nutrients.

°

THE USE OF COFFEE ENEMAS FOR WASTE REMOVAL
Dr. Gerson further found that the cellular systems and body tissues also
excreted waste products accumulated over many years from the taking in of
poor air, bad water, food additives, viruses, germs, and other toxic items. In
order not to overload the liver, which filters these poisons out of the blood, he
found a way to open the bile ducts and help the liver to release the body's
accumulated poisons by means of his renowned coffee enemas.
30 THE GERSON THERAPY

He discovered that, without such a waste-removing method, the liver was
unable to handle the toxic load escaping from all dysfunctional cells and could
be poisoned. In terminally ill cancer patients, Dr. Gerson observed their
toxicities to be so severe that he decided to apply such coffee enemas as
frequently as every four hours. The enemas worked as a primary means of
detoxification (for more information on coffee enemas, see chapter 12).

And his patients reported a welcome additional benefit: pain relief quickly
occurred for them as their livers released cellular toxins. Therefore, another big
advantage of following the Gerson Therapy's sodium-free, high-potassium
detoxifying diet was that Dr. Gerson could discontinue prescribing painkilling
drugs almost at once!

High blood pressure, too, usually came down in about five days, along with
discontinuation of blood pressure medication. Today, we see that the patient's
immune system starts to function and, in some cases, a healing fever develops.
Fever can help to destroy tumor tissue and should not be suppressed unless it
goes way out of range (ie., above 104.5°F).

With all its defenses restored, the body is again capable of destroying tumor
tissue, breaking it down and excreting it. The most aggressive kinds of
malignancies —melanomas, ovarian cancers, small-cell lung cancers, agressive
lymphomas — retreat the most rapidly. One can almost watch them melt away.
Other, less aggressive tumors grow more slowly and retreat less rapidly: the
adenocarcinomas (breast cancer, prostate cancer, bone metastases, etc.)
disappear slowly but steadily. At the same time, the
fat-free diet, high in enzymes, also helps to dissolve atherosclerotic plaque and
clear arteries, so that circulation of the blood improves, as does respiration.
Now we can understand why the whole body heals; whether we are seeing
patients with arthritis, emphysema, colitis, multiple sclerosis, high blood
pressure, heart disease, diabetes, or any other of the multitude of acute or
chronic degenerative diseases, the patients undergo healing.

VEGETABLE JUICE TO ENHANCE THE ENEMAS

Dr. Gerson found that the basic problem underlying all chronic disease is
twofold: deficiency and toxicity. He clearly needed to address both these
problems in order to heal his patients. The deficiency was overcome by the
tremendous amount of nutrients available in the multiple vegetable juices,
given every hour, made from organically grown produce.

Drinking such juices also helped to flush out the kidneys; but they caused
the sick patients’ tissues to release accumulated toxins into the bloodstream
A Brief Biography of Dr. Max Gerson 31

These toxins were filtered out by the liver, but so much poison was burdening
their livers with toxicity. Dr. Gerson realized that if he did not help the body to
remove these poisons rapidly, the liver became seriously damaged and such
released poisons could even cause liver coma. The coffee enemas, given in the
early stages as frequently as every four hours, relieved the liver and even, in
most cases, relieved pain.

As the patient continues to recover, the body dissolves tumor tissue. Toxins
from this dead tissue are released into the bloodstream At this time, it is
important to increase the coffee enemas. It often takes two to three months
before the number of coffee enemas can be reduced to three or four daily.

For over ten years now, coffee enemas have been more intensively studied.
For instance, Peter Lechner, M.D., of the Second Surgical Division of the
Landeskrankenhaus in Graz, Austria, became interested in the Gerson Therapy.
He applied it to many of his outpatients and made some scientific studies on
how the coffee enemas work. Dr. Lechner writes in his clinical report, “Coffee
enemas have a definite effect on the colon which can be observed with an
endoscope. Moreover, Wattenberg and coworkers were able to prove in 1981
that the palmitic acid found in coffee promotes the activity of the enzyme,
gluthathione s-transferase, and other ligands by manifold times above the
norm It is this enzymatic group
which is responsible primarily for the conjugation of free electrophile radicals
which the gall bladder will then release.”

In patients with addictions (to nicotine in cigarettes, heroin, morphine,
cocaine, etc.) the frequent vegetable juices quickly help to overcome cravings,
while the coffee enemas help to clear away any withdrawal symptoms.

Total healing for almost any degenerative condition is not complete until the
patient’s liver and essential organ functions are all restored to full normal
activity. In most patients, healing like this takes at least two years on the full
Gerson therapeutic program, including the ingestion of thirteen glasses of
freshly made juices a day, organically grown vegetarian foods, regular (but
slowly decreasing) coffee enemas, and the taking of potassium as well as
digestive enzyme supplements.

One recent patient, MB of Canton, California, suffered from widely
metastasized melanoma, had cataracts, and was unable to watch TV or read
with or without glasses. Besides these difficulties, MB was suffering from
advanced osteoarthritis “in all her joints,’ she said. Also the woman was obese
and suffered from high blood pressure and diabetes.

MB's life was saved on the Gerson Therapy, supervised by her physician.
When the melanoma was gone, so were this patient's other problems: she could
read and watch IV had good energy, and today at age eighty-four is “working
circles” around other family members. Even her hearing has improved to the
32 THE GERSON THERAPY

point where the family believes that “she hears more than she is supposed
to.” MB no longer requires insulin to control her diabetes.

NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS TO TREAT MULTIPLE HEALTH

PROBLEMS

Dr. Gerson helped his patients’ damaged body functions by adding certain
digestive enzymes, plus thyroid and iodine, to activate the immune system
against multiple health problems. Furthermore, because his patients were so
seriously depleted, he added potassium to an already high- potassium diet. He
also supported the patients’ livers with liver powder capsules and liver
injections and helped patients produce adequate red blood cells with extra
vitamin B,».

It is important to note that with the full application of the Gerson
Therapy, all the body systems are restored to full function. Dr. Gerson’s healing
program is a total metabolic approach, not a single treatment for a specific
symptom of a disease.

Many patients have multiple problems of illness associated with their main
life-threatening disability —cancer as well as diabetes, heart disease, high blood
pressure, arthritis, atherosclerosis with leg cramps, macular degeneration,
cataracts, and so on. When the body truly heals, all of these types of health
troubles involving overall physiological degeneration disappear, not just a
single disease entity. With true healing, one cannot heal selectively — all medical
difficulties improve steadily and finally go away permanently.

Charlotte Gerson cites the case of a patient who was suffering from prostate
cancer as well as regular kidney colics, high blood pressure, and three herniated
disks resulting in severe pain and atrophy of the thigh muscle in his left leg.
After two years on the Gerson Therapy, the man got rid of all these problems.
His prostate was clear; he had no more kidney colics; without taking any drugs,
his elevated blood pressure lowered to normal and stayed there; and the
damaged vertebral disks had re-formed, thus allowing his thigh muscles also to
improve. He had been on total disability due to his many health problems, but
this patient returned to completely normal activity.

Following the Gerson Therapy described over fifty years ago, people become
well in the same way in modern times.

One patient, Mrs. GF, was told that her arteries were 90 percent clogged and
that she needed immediate coronary artery bypass surgery, or she would not
A Brief Biography of Dr. Max Gerson 33

see the weekend! She refused to undergo the operation and traveled instead to
the Gerson Therapy hospital in Tijuana, Mexico. GF was in a very dangerous
situation, needing oxygen even to sleep, and was barely able to walk across the
room without assistance. But she followed the Gerson Therapy faithfully both
under hospital staff supervision and on her own after returning home.

Upon reexamining her two years later, the same doctor found that GF’s
arteries were 100 percent clear and she was able to function normally. He
claimed that some kind of medical miracle had taken place.

WHY PHYSICIANS HAVE FAILED TO TIE DIET TO DISEASES

BEFORE Now

It has taken organized allopathic medicine too long to appreciate the
connection between diet and degenerative diseases. Yet, recognizing that we
have lost the war on cancer, as stated in 1986 by John C. Bailar Il, Ph.D.,
professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at McGill University in Montreal,
Canada,! medical doctors and their patients have now altered their thinking.
Finally physicians have come to accept that diet is tied to diseases of all types.

Health professionals have had to hit upon nutritional therapy almost as a
last resort against degenerative diseases, especially for cancer. Treatment using
diet and nutrition is absolutely mandatory simply because too many patients
never get well with the applications of standard, allopathic, conventionally
practiced medicine and oncology — the disease-oriented medicine of orthodoxy.
Itis time to recognize diet as a powerful ally in the healing process.

Reference for Chapter Two

1. Bailar, J.C.; Smith, EM. “Progress against cancer?’ New England journal of
Medicine. 314:1226, 1986.
Chapter Three

THE BIOLOGICAL BASIS OF
THE GERSON THERAPY

S o firmly founded on scientific principles of physiology and nutrition are
the therapeutic approaches developed by Max Gerson, M.D., to cancer and
other chronic illnesses, they remain just as clinically valid today as in their
earliest decade of establishment. One might come to believe that over a span of
almost seventy years, as new medical insights and clinical protocols were
uncovered, Dr. Gerson's method might have been superseded by other
treatments; yet this is not the case.

The Gerson Therapy manages the body’s potassium, sodium (salt), protein,
and water intake. In this chapter we offer an explanation of what the Gerson
biological (metabolic) concept means plus how and why it works to promote
healing. There definitely is a need for animal protein restriction as the means
for warding off degenerative diseases of all kinds. Required as well for reversal
of cancer and other chronic diseases are potassium supplementation, acute
sodium limitation, calorie restriction, protein sparing, and thyroid hormone
addition. As any Gerson Therapy participant knows well, coffee enemas are
featured as a way to remove circulating toxins and partial metabolites by
dilating bile ducts and cleansing the liver. Dr. Gerson believed that the liver is
our most important organ for maintaining the body's biochemistry for health as
well as overcoming degenerative diseases, cancer in particular.

Hyperalimentation, the medication of his therapy, utilizes vegetarian foods,
including raw fruit, well-cooked vegetables, salads, a special soup, oatmeal,
and vegetable juices. They are the hyperalimenting medications, which have
proven to be profoundly effective nutritionally, easily absorbed also by a sick
body, extremely complex molecularly, and exquisite materials chemically.
The Biological Basis of the Gerson Therapy 35

Ingesting them in quantity invariably restores health to an unhealthy body and
prevents ill health for a well-functioning one.

Accordingly, this chapter is a preparation for utilizing the recipes of chapter
22, which describes the cooking of those specific foods for enjoying total
wellness. Here we provide a full description of the biological basis for
incorporating the Gerson Therapy as your personal way of life.

SUMMARIZING THE BIOLOGICAL BASIS OF THE GERSON
THERAPY

Being an intensive treatment based on nutrition, designed to restore and
reactivate all the body systems, the Gerson Therapy particularly strengthens
one’s immune system, enzyme system, and hormone system, along with
correcting the functioning of all essential organs. It brings the body into
homeostasis. The program's originator learned during the 1930s that in chronic
degenerative diseases most of the organ systems become damaged and
function poorly to the point of shutting down. He concluded that the body’s
innate healing mechamsm eventually becomes inactive so that a debilitated body
loses its ability to fight the attacking disease and heal.

Successful treatment for chronic illnesses requires full-bodied nutrition,
specifically, a sick person must eat organic vegetarian foods, all freshly
prepared. Also mandatory is the drinking of thirteen glasses of raw vegetable
juices for their enzymatic effects. All foods must be free of added salt and fats,
with one specific exception: flaxseed oil (high in linoleic and linolenic acids).
Thus the damaged organ systems are flooded with living nutrients, easily
absorbed and able to enter the deficient tissues. Required foods are high in
potassium, which Dr. Gerson found to be lacking in longtime ill persons.

When active minerals and enzymes are restored to the tissues, these
nutrients release the excess sodium and toxins that have accumulated during
the course of years of faulty nutrition. It becomes imperative then to help the
body (the liver in particular) to filter out released toxins and get rid of them In
order to achieve such a release and bring about detoxification, Dr. Gerson
discovered that caffeine given rectally definitely assists the liver and its bile
ducts to release their accumulated poisons into the intestinal tract for
elimination.

Ozone given by rectal insufflation is also very valuable since it increases
blood oxygenation, energy, and the ability of organ systems to function at
higher levels. Most patients residing in a Gerson-certified health care facility
also inhale air furnished by an ozone generator operating in their rooms. The
machine thus provides patients with better oxygenation and overcomes
36 THE GERSON THERAPY

antigenic odors. A similar ozone generator may be installed in the home.

PHYSIOLOGICAL UNIVERSALITY OF THE GERSON THERAPY

The basic philosophy of the Gerson Therapy —hypernutrition from whole
foods and detoxification—is universal for advantageous body functioning. As
we have mentioned, such universality includes elimination of all toxic
materials—natural and synthetic—derived from any source of additives,
perfumes, cosmetics, flavorings, dyes, herbicides, fluoride, chloride, metallic
poisons, pesticide residues, cleaning agents, and as much of other
environmental pollutants as possible.

The Gerson Therapy has to be adjusted for particular body breakdowns with
their resulting ailments and conditions, including candidiasis, diabetes, colitis,
ascites in terminal cancer patients, cardiovascular disease, and high doses of
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, prednisone, and other common drugs, plus a
myriad of additional difficulties. Often patients suffer from infections, low-
grade fevers, lack of appetite, pain, and many more complications, some of
them subclinical. All of these disabilities are addressed individually and
collectively during the course of administering the Gerson program. For human
physiology, the Gerson Therapy is restorative and completely enhancing.

Along with the basic nutrition and detoxification, certain food supplements
are also used to overcome deficiencies of vitamins, minerals, hormones,
enzymes, and other physiological items. The limited number of Gerson
Therapy nutritional supplements include a potassium compound, digestive
enzymes, thyroid hormone, iodine (Lugol's solution), vitamin B> (niacin), and
vitamin By, (cobalamin), as well as injectable crude liver extract and/or liver
powder or tablets. These “medications” are also adjusted to each patient's
needs.

How THE GERSON THERAPY ALIGNS WITH CONVENTIONAL
TREATMENTS

A few of the treatments used in conventional medicine are compatible with
the Gerson Therapy, including hydrotherapy, oxygen, antibiotics, in some
cases radiation, and certain surgical operations (as for gastrointestinal tract
blockage or the debulking of tumors). Surprisingly, perhaps, certain other
physical therapies such as deep massage, vigorous exercise, and saltwater
swimming are harmful.

Chemotherapy is not encouraged at all because it is highly toxic, sup-
pressive of the immune system, and sometimes palliative but hardly curative.
The Biological Basis of the Gerson Therapy 37

Someone who undergoes chemotherapy prior to adopting Dr. Gerson’s
treatment starts off at a true immunological disadvantage. The Gerson Therapy
in no way advocates the use of cytotoxic chemicals for killing off cancer cells
because such chemicals frequently bring patients closer to more serious illness
and death.

Yet numerous cancer patients pretreated with chemotherapy can still
respond positively to the Gerson approach. These people include especially
those suffering from ovarian cancer, lymphomas, kidney cancer, and some of
the glandular malignancies, such as breast and prostate cancer. For those with
pancreatic cancer, the Gerson Institute has seen a number of long-term, total
recoveries with the Gerson Therapy (see chapter 21); however, we are sorry to
report that poor responses are likely to result for the pancreas-cancer patient if
chemotherapy was previously applied. The organ becomes just too damaged
by the cytotoxicity of chemicals applied.

LONG-TERM SURVIVAL AND SIDE EFFECTS

The largest body of evidence offering proof of the Gerson Therapy's value
was given in Dr. Gerson’s original text, A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases,
first published in 1958. Even back then, almost all of his patients had been
biopsied prior to starting the Gerson Therapy by different accredited medical
institutions around the United States. All but two of the patients shown in this
description of fifty cases were in terminal condition. They survived a minimum
of five years; at least a dozen people have remained alive for forty-five years
from when they first began their Gerson treatment plan.

Since the Gerson Therapy has been promoted more and reestablished
during the last twenty years, numbers of documented cases of recovered
patients have been assembled. You will read about three such situations in
chapter 21. Admittedly, the only cancer that has been documented statistically
with a retrospective analysis peer-reviewed and published in a medical journal
is malignant melanoma (see chapter 6). In other cancers, the Gerson Institute
records many individual recovered cases, all with prior biopsies and long-term
survival, but exact figures are still not available because the Gerson Institute
loses track of patients. They tend to stop communicating and go on with their
lives. But now the Gerson Institute’s Client Services department has created a
Patient Support Network to provide a listing of fellow patients to those
undertaking the treatment on their own.

There have been no untoward side effects from the use of the Gerson
Therapy. Dr. Gerson’s recommended fresh organic foods and juices —his
medication consisting of only normal body substances and the cleansing
38 THE GERSON THERAPY

enemas—in no way cause bodily damage. Certain patients are not treatable:
those with organ transplants, patients on dialysis, and patients who have had
essential organs removed. Some uninformed persons warn about dehydration
or another imagined difficulty. They just don't know what they are talking
about. Such people are down on what they are not up on.

In contrast, sometimes Gerson patients jokingly refer to certain “side effects”
of their program—the beneficial ones. These advantageous effects include the
clearing up of high blood pressure, elimination of arthritis, sight restoration in
glaucoma, self-correction of herniated disks, pulmonary improvement in
asthma, and many more betterments for health troubles.

Please take note of the following double fact, which may seem obvious to
you after having read this book, but it’s something that uninformed persons do
not acknowledge:

* Itis often impossible to heal a specific disease such as cancer while the
body continues to suffer from diabetes, arthritis, heart disease, and most
other chronic disturbances.

+ We see that eventually all the other afflictions also disappear when the
Gerson Therapy is utilized for healing cancer.

MANAGING POTASSIUM, SALT, AND WATER INTAKE

Around every tumor or arthritic joint, in most chronic viral conditions such
as genital herpes, and in other long-standing pathologies, the patients’ tissues
which have lost potassium do gain sodium and swell with too much water.
Today it has been established in modern medicine that this is a physiological
fact.

When he studied tuberculous infections, Dr. Gerson observed the same
phenomenon and recorded it in his published works. Around every tubercular
cavern and cavity he saw a puffy malfunctioning sphere of adjacent tissue
damaged by toxins escaping from the tuberculosis organism Partial
metabolites in the disease lesions cause difficulties because they are merely
waste material that continues with destructive processes when left in place.
Their presence upsets otherwise normal tissue so that it, in turn, becomes
damaged.

By restricting sodium and substituting elevated amounts of potassium by
providing his patients with a fresh fruit and vegetable diet, Dr. Gerson was able
to bring about absorption of cellular edema. The patients’ swellings
disappeared by eliminating the tissue damage syndrome that surrounds not
The Biological Basis of the Gerson Therapy 39

only tubercular tissue but also tumor tissue.

The Gerson Therapy, therefore, creates a physiological situation in which
distressed cells slowly return to normal. What brings this about is the unspiced
low-sodium, high-potassium diet required by the Gerson Therapy. It works
therapeutically —nothing else known in drug-oriented allopathic, traditional
Indian Ayurvedic, Central American shaman, traditional Chinese, holistic,
complementary and alternative, chiropractic, naturopathic, homeopathic, or
other form of medicine achieves this same beneficial effect in damaged cells.
We repeat, this diet developed by Max Gerson, M_D., is a primary reason for
the Gerson Therapy’s efficaciousness against cancer and other chronic illnesses.

Gilbert Ning Ling, Ph.D., father of the new cellular biology that’s based on
“dry’ physics rather than “wet’ chemistry (which had previously been the
foundation of modern allopathic medicine), early in the 1970s, predicted the
value of a high-potassium, low-sodium nutritional intake for the obliteration of
chronic disease.1 Dr. Ling’s research had evolved from Dr. Gerson’s original
investigations and treatments, which he had employed, first for the elimination
of migraine headaches, and then for allergies, tuberculosis, and chronic
diseases, and later adapted as his anticancer program.

Then another pioneering physician, the medical physicist and researcher
Freeman W. Cope, M_D., Ph.D., in 1978, uncovered evidence to prove that Dr.
Ling’s association-induction hypothesis derived from the Gerson work was
correct. Dr. Cope demonstrated that cells are poisoned by any one of a unifying
set of occurrences which usually includes oxygen starvation, one or more
physical traumas, and/or some type of chemical insult such as the toxic metal
syndrome.?

No matter what is the tissue’s origin of dysfunction, the same responses
occur in cells throughout any part of the body: first the damaged cell loses most
of its potassium, next it accepts an abundance of sodium, and finally it swells
with excessive water (to dilute the sodium). This bloated cell’s required life-
sustaining energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), created from
the burning of sugar through oxidation, dissipates. Without ATP the cell dies.
Lose enough cells and the tissue dies. Experience a dramatic drop in tissue
substance and the organ dies. Lack a necessary organ and the human being
dies. In his two major published works, Dr. Cope informed physiologists about
this pathologic occurrence.34

About a decade ago, Dr. Cope’s concept was proved to be true by the
additional medical research of the respected Mexican physiologist and
cardiologist Demetrio Sodi-Pallares, M.D. Then Raymond Damadian, M.D.,
inventor of the diagnostic device magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), confirmed
that human cells behave more like ion exchange granules in a water softener
than like bags of water. Prior to Dr. Damadian’s theory, medicine’s idea of
40 THE GERSON THERAPY

“cells as bags of water” had been the basis on which almost all medical
treatments were built (until now). But medical science is evolving.

Going back chronologically, collectively, and in summary, Dr. Damadian,
Dr. Sodi-Pallares, Dr. Cope, Dr. Ling, and Dr. Gerson have brought forth a new
medical foundation for why diseases become chronically degenerative and how
they may be reversed. The foundation developed by these five medical
scientists is that the cellular cytoplasm becomes latticed with a protein-lipid
macromolecule through which an electron current flows. Energy-storing ATP is
complexed with this macromolecule, polarizing and energizing it, to form
many interactive, cooperative association sites which prefer potassium over
sodium. Give the sick cell potassium, and it gets well. Then restrict animal
protein, and it becomes even healthier.

PROTEIN RESTRICTION

With the aim of ridding damaged body cells of more sodium, Dr. Gerson
eliminated animal protein from the patient's diet—at least for a period of six or
eight weeks. He caused the condition of sodium outflooding (what he named
“Natrium Ausschuss”) so that the detrimental mineral poured out of the body in
its urine waste. That way, edema gets absorbed by the cells, tissues, and organs.
In the context of Dr. Ling’s modern work on biophysics, Dr. Gerson’s healing
procedure is absolutely correct. During studies that he conducted in Egypt,
Robert Good, M_D., former director of the Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer
Research, showed that the Gerson method of protein restriction tends to
stimulate T-lymphocyte activity and cell-mediated immunity.

Bioavailable protein derives from the content of potatoes, vegetables,
vegetable juices, and oatmeal. About 40 grams of protein lost each day by waste
excretion is replaced through the Gerson basic vegan diet with some added
dairy protein. The patient is kept in a positive nitrogen balance.

In addition to protein restriction, the Gerson diet does reduce calories
(despite the patient's consuming 20 pounds of produce daily) by means of
limiting fat intake. In this diet the only fats allowed are from the ongoing eating
of oatmeal (1.5 percent calories in fat), flaxseed oil, and the fatty acids in some
vegetables and fruits —a total of just 90 calories of fat daily.

The Gerson Therapy was perfected, therefore, to offer potassium sup-
plementation, sodium near-elimination, calorie limitation, protein restriction,
and thyroid hormone addition. Additionally, there is restructuring of all the
cells’ water content to produce molecular reorganization of their protoplasmic
water.
The Biological Basis of the Gerson Therapy 41

The ill person’s body activities are speeded along as well It's done on
purpose, for the Gerson Therapy specifically is a metabolic treatment that
stimulates all body processes.

Metabolism is the sum total of all the biochemical processes going on inside
the body, and metabolic therapies focus on ways to balance these chemical
processes — enabling normal cells to thrive and cancer cells to become depleted
and die, or revert back to normal. The therapeutic goal of metabolic therapies
such as Dr. Gerson’s approach is to rebuild and revitalize all of the body’s life-
sustaining functions, thereby helping to stop and reverse cancer or to prevent a
recurrence.>

Metabolism consists of two fundamental phases, anabolism and catabolism.
Anabolism is the constructive, building-up phase, fostering growth and order,
storage of energy, and production of organic substances such as enzymes,
hormones, antibodies, and cell membrane receptors. Catabolism is the
destructive phase, in which matter is broken down and energy (ATP) is used.
All fundamental biochemical processes are either anabolic or catabolic in
nature. The Gerson Therapy stimulates both so that the body finds its required
homeostatic balance.°

METABOLIC SPEEDUP

Dr. Gerson wanted cellular metabolism, so he turned it on with large
loading dosages of the iodides, iodine, and up to 5 grains of thyroid hormone
too. With their ingestion, the patient's metabolism speeds up as manifested by
his or her racing pulse, perhaps over 100 beats per minute.

Thyroid hormone signals mitochondria (organelles in the cytoplasm of cells
that contain genetic material and many enzymes important for cell metabolism)
to multiply and increase production of ATP for more cellular energy. Iodides
and iodine affect many metabolizing tissues directly in the same way.

When tumor tissue is present, it spreads pathology outward like a sphere
(resembling the sun’s penumbra), which is several times the tumor’s volume.
Within this sphere, cellular tissue works poorly because it is waterlogged,
insulted, and damaged by cancerous toxins. Metabolic waste escapes from the
tumor and poisons what had been normal tissue. Not functioning well at all,
the tissue just sits there stewing in its own waste without any good immunity,
in a state of poor blood circulation, lacking resistance, and experiencing bad
drainage.

Even with the tumor removed surgically, the sphere of tissue remains
waterlogged unless the cancer patient is provided a way to correct that tissue
damage. With the Gerson Therapy, the sodium ring around tumors disappears
42 THE GERSON THERAPY

within weeks, beause that’s how effective Dr. Gerson’s management has shown
itself against the kind of tissue damage syndrome that is seen as the penumbra
around tumors.

THE BIOLOGICAL BASIS FOR COFFEE ENEMAS

Capable of removing circulating toxins and partial metabolites, the coffee
enema dilates bile ducts. This happens because the coffee administered by
means of a cleansing enema stimulates an enzyme system in the liver known as
glutathione S-transferase (GST) that removes a vast variety of free radicals
(electrophiles) from the bloodstream.

Electrophiles are atomic particles with one or more electrons in unpaired
spins which have an affinity for other electrons. They want to get involved
where they should not. As charged particles, these free radicals damage
membranes of cells and inflict disturbances in cellular metabolism.

Under the influence of a coffee enema the GST enzyme system increases in
activity to 650 percent above normal and removes electrophiles from the
bloodstream. No material other than coffee (not even coenzyme Qio or
oligomeric proanthocyanidine [OPC]) is known to stimulate free radical
quenching in such a proportion. The free radicals are mopped up and removed
by GST enzymes through the use of coffee cleansing of the lower bowel (gut).

During the time coffee is being held in the gut, all the blood in the body
passes through the liver at least five times. The blood circulates through the
liver every three minutes. (According to concepts espoused in Ayurvedic
medicine, the liver regrows and replaces itself about every three months.) The
palmitate compounds and the caffeine, theobromine, and theophylline in coffee
cause dilation of the liver’s blood vessels and bile ducts, relaxation of smooth
muscles, stimulation of intestinal peristalsis, and elevation of bile flow.

The quart of distilled water being used as a vehicle for this internally
supplied therapeutic coffee concentrate assists in these various actions too.
Toxic bile is flushed out along with its bile salts to bring about effec tive dialysis
that is advantageous.

The coffee enema removes ammonialike products, toxic-bound nitrogen,
protein derivatives, polyamines, amino acids, coaggulated clumps, and
complexes, all of which are waste products of metabolism Getting rid of them
frees the body from becoming poisoned by its own wastes.
The Biological Basis of the Gerson Therapy 43

THE GERSON TECHNIQUE OF HYPERALIMENTATION

We have stated a number of times that for the Gerson patient, vegetarian
foods, raw fruit, and vegetable juices act as the medications of choice.
Collectively consuming such foods brings about hyperalimentation. And we've
emphasized that such organically grown, freshly prepared natural foods are
profoundly effective, extremely complex, chemically exquisite substances that
heal better than anything ever invented by the mind of man. Now please accept
our warning: Tamper with such nourishment at your own risk. Our advice is to
avoid synthetic substances, including prescribed drugs, whenever you can do
so.

Macronutnent Inyperalimentation, the practice of selecting only food
substances produced in nature under ideal conditions to feed the body optimal
nourishment, is the method employed in the Gerson Therapy. It works to heal
ill health in the body and restore it to homeostasis.

As described again, the biological basis for the Gerson Therapy is predicated
on sodium restriction, potassium supplementation, protein limitation, calorie
reduction through avoidance of fat, dialysis of the bloodstream for reduction of
electrophiles, macronutrient hyperalimentation, salt and water management,
and accelerated metabolism. This health-revitalization program has come out of
the thinking of one man, Max Gerson, M.D. By studious application of his
clinical work with patients, his search of the medical literature, and his strong
scientific foundations, we are the beneficiaries.

References for Chapter Three

1. Ling, G.N. In Search of the Physical Basis of Life. New York: Plenum Press,
1984.

2. Casdorph, HR; Walker, M. Toxic Metal Syndrome. Garden City Park, N.Y.:
Avery Publishing Group, 1995.

3. Cope, F.W “Pathology of structured water and associated cations in cells
(the tissue damage syndrome) and its medical treatment.” Physiological Chem-
stry and Physics. 6) :547—553, 1977.

4. Cope, EW “The Ling association-induction hypothesis: the high potas-
sium, low sodium diet of the Gerson cancer therapy.” Plrysiological Chemistry
and Physics, 10(5):465-468, 1978.

5. Diamond, WJ.; Cowden, W.L.; Goldberg, B. An Alternative Medicine
Definitive Guide to Cancer. Tiburon, Calif.: Future Medicine Publishing, 1997, p.
309.

6. ibid., p. 310.
44 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chapter Four

THE CORE OF THE GERSON
THERAPY

Rees in the county of Devon, England, for all of his fifty-eight years,
Xavier Naude, an independently wealthy, refined British gentleman, has
been an exponent of experiencing life in full measure, including heavy
smoking. By 1992 Mr. Naude had developed emphysema, the result of his
smoke inhalation, which grew steadily worse with each carton of cigarettes he
consumed. Indeed, Mr. Naude burned up three packs daily.

In pulmonary emphysema, the air sacs (alveoli) of the lungs lose their
permeability and become damaged, which reduces their surface area for the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. The condition’s worst and most
frightening symptom is breathlessness, which may be complicated by
infections. There has been no specific drug or other medical treatment, and the
patient often becomes dependent on the intake of oxygen by mechanical means
such as the use of oxygen mask and tank plus inhalant devices.

How emphysema develops is hardly understood at all, although it is known
to be particularly common in men. While it is associated with chronic
bronchitis and advancing age, inhaling cigarette smoke is the main source of
this disease.

Xavier Naude started to use mechanical drug inhalants and vasodilators to
help him breathe. But more and more, he found himself suffering from
exhaustion. In June 1993, he learned about the healing qualities of the Gerson
Therapy, and by September of that year he had traveled to San
Diego, crossed the U.S./Mexican border and enrolled as a patient at a Tijuana
The Core of the Gerson Therapy 45

clinic providing the Gerson Therapy.

Prior to participating in the Gerson Therapy, even after giving up smoking,
using the inhalants, and taking other medications in England, Mr. Naude felt
severe pressure on his chest. He was unable to climb stairs and encountered
great difficulty breathing all the time. His doctors in the United Kingdom had
explained that 70 percent of his lung tissue was lost. In addition, he
experienced awful leg cramps when he tried to sleep. The poor man also felt
arthritic pain in his fingers so severely that he could not close them around a
glass of juice.

In Mexico, all of these symptoms disappeared one after the other while he
was receiving the Gerson program. Mr. Naude reported, in fact, that even after
the first day of his participation in such dietary treatment approach, his leg
cramps were gone. Some days later he could make a fist, an action previously
impossible, but now he felt no more finger pain. And at the end of a week, the
pressure on his chest eased too. By the conclusion of two weeks on the Gerson
Therapy, Mr. Naude discovered that he could walk without stopping to catch
his breath.

He remained at the Gerson hospital for three weeks all together, and af-
terward followed the therapeutic program on his own at home. He continued
to thrive. For Xavier Naude, there was nothing mysterious about the Gerson
Therapy. It had a clear-cut self-treatment plan, open and understandable to
anyone willing to give the dietary/ detoxification combination some study. Mr.
Naude stated, “I am totally satisfied with the tremendous progress I’ve made
away from the disability of emphysema.”

Xavier Naude’s Harley Street thoracic specialist also confirmed by written
report that his patient's lung capacity had increased in a relatively short period
from 30 to 50 percent. The doctor found this astonishing. No longer could
emphysema be considered uncorrectable.

PATIENTS LIKE XAVIER NAUDE ARE TYPICAL

If there’s any secret connected with the Gerson Therapy, it is that Gerson
patients are helped past the burden of not only cancer but nearly every other
acute or chronic degenerative disease. Emphysema is but one example among
dozens.

Cytotoxic poisons used in oncology merely attack tumor tissue while
damaging normal cells at the same time. The Gerson Therapy does not do this.
Rather, Dr. Gerson’s fundamental idea, as he stated, is the following: “A normal
body has the capacity to keep all cells functioning properly. It prevents any
abnormal transformation and growth. Therefore, the natural task of this cancer
46 THE GERSON THERAPY

therapy is to bring the body back to that normal physiology, or as near to it as is
possible.”1

Dr. Gerson’s “secret” nutritional method steadily changes, by degrees. It
brings an exceedingly sick and malfunctioning body to a state of sub- clinical
illness, then advances that body to low-level wellness, followed by attaining
homeostasis, next becoming a body exhibiting high-level wellness, and finally
to being able to feel the joy of achieving the highest peak of physiological
performance. Abstracted from two sources, the Gerson Healing Newsletter and
Dr. Max Gerson’s original book, A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases, the
following sections offer you a brief and simplified description of the Gerson
diet from top to bottom Later chapters will cover the methods of
detoxification, which begin with juicing in chapter 9 and go on to coffee
enemas in chapters 12 and 13. All of these procedures are equally vital for a
sick person's recovery.

AN ABSTRACT OF THE GERSON THERAPY

From information we've already furnished, you know that in the years just
prior to and following World War II, German- American physician Max Gerson,
MD., newly immigrated to the United States, proposed an empirically
developed set of general dietary and medical measures. He used measures for
the successful management of patients suffering from body system
deterioration of all types, most especially tuberculosis, kidney diseases,
diabetes, liver diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, stroke, gallbladder disease, nearly
every addiction, and almost all of the over one hundred kinds of malignancies.

Dr. Gerson’s therapeutic techniques involved having each patient use an
integrated set of particular health care methods and managements, including
focusing on the following (see Table 4-1):2

A. salt and water intake management through sodium (Na*) mineral
restriction and potassium (K*) mineral supplementation,

B. superabundant intakes (hyperalimentation) of both macronutrients and

micronutrients through the regular hourly preparation and drinking of

raw, organically grown fruit and vegetable juices,

extreme limitation of fats consumed in foods,

temporary protein restriction through a basically vegetarian diet,

natural, supplemental thyroid administration,

amon

production of bile by the liver (choleresis) by means of frequent self-
administered coffee enemas.
The Core of the Gerson Therapy 47

THE CORE OF THE GERSON THERAPY

Dr. Gerson’s dietary program, once established, was approved and em-
ployed by large numbers of medical authors who duplicated his results to cure
migraine headaches and cutaneous tuberculosis (lupus vulgaris). It was also
described in clinical journals published worldwide as a therapy for the various
forms of pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and bone tuberculoses; cardiorenal
insufficiency; skin conditions of many types including eczema, lichen planus,
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), psoriasis, and pruritus; bronchitis and
bronchiectasis; and nearly every liver and gallbladder condition.

By modifying the program, Dr. Gerson applied his therapeutic nutritional
regimen to cancer, rheumatoid and osteoarthritis, cardiovascular diseases,
multiple sclerosis, tuberculosis, migraine headaches, and much more,
publishing results in American and German peer-reviewed journals. Table 4-1
reveals the core of Max Gerson’s precise approach to changing an ill
individual's physiology to a healthy one. By following the Gerson Therapy
faithfully, a sick person can markedly improve his or her chances for illness
reversal, resumption of good health, and assurance of continuing wellness.

Harold D. Foster, B.Sc., Ph.D., professor of geography at the University of
Victoria in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada explained, “Gerson’s Therapy
drastically alters the mineral balance of the patient's body. Anyone
undertaking this treatment rapidly loses sodium, while at the same time
potassium and iodine body levels rise. Milk, cheese, and butter are forbidden,
especially during the first months. Calcium is available through the carrot and
green juices to the extent that osteoporosis can be reversed with the Gerson
Therapy. The emphasis on fresh fruits and vegetables also means that the
patient received high levels of anti-oxidants, especially beta carotene and
vitamin C5

THE GERSON THERAPY—IN HIS OWN WorRDS
Here, in Dr. Gerson’s own words (see the original edition of A Cancer
therapy), is a summary of his theory.4

As science is not yet developed to the point of knowing all the enzymes,
vitamins and many biological functions of hormones and minerals, it is
safer to use foods raised, if possible, by an organic gardening process, thus
obeying the laws of nature. [Today, more than forty-one years after he
wrote these words, Dr. Gerson’s concept is proven even more appropri-
ate.] This observation helped the human race for thousands of years before
any science was developed. In this way we bring in all known vitamins
and enzymes, both the discovered and the undiscovered ones, and
48 THE GERSON THERAPY

especially the unknown — “life stimulating substances’ — given best as
fresh as possible and not damaged by refining or preserving processes,
such as canned [smoked, frozen, freeze-dried, dehydrated, irradiated, and
otherwise manhandled] food. These contain all of the necessary substances
in their proper quantity, mixture and composition, and are regulated by
instinct, hunger, taste, smell, sight and other factors.

TABLE 4-1
The Core of the Gerson Therapy

The Gerson Therapy is a series of harmonious and cohesive medical
treatments which have been observed to cure many individual cases of
advanced cancer and other major health problems in mankind.

* The treatments consist of salt and water management which holds down the
intake of Na* and increases the intake of K*.

* Asick person’s metabolism and cell energy production are stimulated by
supplementing with natural thyroid hormone.

* Maximum digestibility of nutrients is achieved by hourly drinking fresh, raw
vegetable and fruit juices and eating a basically vegetarian diet.

* Fatis restricted in order, to lower intake of disease promoters of all kinds.

* The restriction of protein tends to uplift a patient's immune response.

* Coffee enemas stimulate the bowel and liver enzymes to eliminate toxins
across the bowel wall. Itis a kind of intestinal dialysis.

Three-quarters of the foods [for illness-prevention] which should be
consumed include the following:

All kinds of fruits, mostly fresh and some prepared in different ways;
freshly prepared fruit juices (orange, grapefruit, grape, etc.); fruit salads; cold
fruit soups; mashed bananas, raw grated apples, applesauce, etc.

All vegetables freshly prepared, some stewed in their own juices and others
either raw or finely grated, such as carrots, cauliflower or celery; vegetable
salads, soups, etc.; some dried fruits and vegetables are permitted but no
frozen ones.

Potatoes are best when baked; the contents may be mashed with nonfat
yogurt or salt-free soup; they should never be fried and preferably boiled in
their jackets.

Salads of green leaves or mixed with tomatoes, fruits, vegetables, etc.

Bread should contain whole rye or some (up to 20 percent) whole wheat
flour, or these may be mixed, it should be refined as little as possible. Oatmeal
The Core of the Gerson Therapy 49

should be used freely. Buckwheat cakes and potato pancakes are optional, as
are brown sugar, honey, maple sugar and maple candy. (No baking powder or
baking soda may be used, even in cooking.)

Milk and milk products, such as pot cheese and other kinds of cheese which
are not salted or spiced, buttermilk, nonfat yoghurt and butter. Cream and ice
cream should be reduced to a minimum or restricted to holidays (ice cream is
“poison” for children).

The remaining one-fourth of the dietary regimen, which allows for personal
choice, may consist of meat, fish, eggs, nuts, candies, cakes, or whatever one
likes best. Nicotine should be avoided; liquors, wine and beer should be
reduced to a minimum in favor of fresh fruit juices; coffee and tea should be
cut to a minimum with the exception of the following herb teas: peppermint,
camomile, linden flower, orange flower, and a few others.

Salt, bicarbonate of soda, smoked fish and sausage should be avoided as
much as possible, as should sharp condiments such as pepper and ginger, but
fresh garden herbs should be used— onions, parsley leaves, chives, celery and
even some horseradish.

As for vegetables and fruits, they should, I repeat, be stewed in their own
juices to avoid the loss of minerals easily dissolved in water during cooking.
It seems that these valuable minerals are not so well absorbed when they are
out of their colloidal state.

All vegetables (except mushrooms and cucumbers) may be used. Especially
recommended for their mineral content are carrots, peas, tomatoes, Swiss
chard, spinach, string beans, Brussels sprouts, artichokes, beets cooked with
apples, cauliflower with tomatoes, red cabbage with apples, raisins, etc.

The best way to prepare vegetables is to cook them slowly for one and
one-half to two hours, without water. To prevent burning, place a heat
distributing metal plate (asbestos mats have been replaced) under the
saucepan. You may also use some stock of [special Hippocrates] soup or else
onions or sliced tomatoes may be added to the vegetables. This also will
improve the taste. Spinach water is too bitter for use; it generally is not liked
and should be drained off. Onions, leeks and tomatoes have enough liquid of
their own to keep them moist while cooking. (Beets should be cooked like
potatoes, in their jackets and with water.) Wash and scrub vegetables
thoroughly, but do not peel or scrape them Saucepans must be tightly
covered to prevent steam from escaping. Covers must be heavy or close
fitting. (Use no pressure cookers.) Cooked vegetables may be kept in the
refrigerator overnight. To warm them, heat slowly with a little soup or fresh
tomato juice.

Dr. Gerson goes on to editorialize about his nutritional program's dietary
summary. In conclusion, he additionally writes:5
50 THE GERSON THERAPY

The human body has a wonderful reserve power and many possibilities of
adjustment, but the best defense apparatus is a 100 percent functioning
metabolism and reabsorption in the intestinal tract in combination with a
healthy liver. People may conclude, needlessly, that it is not important to
place so much emphasis on nutrition. This may be so under normal con-
ditions and if these persons are not damaged through heredity, civilization,
sickness, trauma or other accumulations (nicotine and other poisons).

Civilization has partially taken away this natural bestowal.

Experiments on test groups to produce different vitamin deficiencies by
omitting food containing these vitamins showed that one third can be made
deficient in about four months and two thirds in six months; only 5 to 6
percent resisted ten months of deficient feeding here in the United States.
These nutritional experiments and others show that only a minority
possesses a complete intact reabsorption apparatus and at the same time
enough adjustment and reserve power for healthy and unhealthy periods in
their lives.

Itis not necessary for healthy persons to care so much about enough or
too many carbohydrates and proteins, and their caloric value should be
ignored. However, one cannot ignore the absolutely necessary minerals,
vitamins and enzymes in their most natural composition and in sufficient
amounts for a relatively long term and remain unpunished. The minerals
have to be in the tissues where they belong, as they are the carriers of the
electrical potentials in the cells; and there they enable the hormones, vit-
amins and enzymes to function properly. This gives the body the best
working power and reserves for a sound metabolism and life.

REDISCOVERING THE WHEEL

A spate of popular consumer books —some hitting the best-seller lists —are
now discussing Dr. Max Gerson’s concept of diet and nutrition as the means of
preventing and treating cancer. They are filling library and bookstore shelves
today with what medical/nutrition specialists consider some kind of
revolutionary concept. For them, it’s new information. And none of the authors
are giving our Dr. Gerson the credit due. Such books as Dr. Bob Arnot’s The
Breast Cancer Prevention Diet and Eat to Beat Cancer and Dr. Gaynor’s Cancer
Prevention Program make the case that anyone can eat to reduce the risk of
degenerative diseases such as cancer. Such books lay out specific regimens to
follow that are copycat versions of Dr. Gerson’s original dietary approach to
eliminating all types of illnesses, cancer in particular.

Moreover, some former professional/ political persecutors of Dr. Gerson are
rediscovering the wheel by talking about food as a means of therapy against
The Core of the Gerson Therapy 51

cancer and other chronic illnesses. Grudgingly, pushed and pulled by the
public’s disillusionment with President Richard Nixon's lost “war against
cancer,” they are coming around to believing in the importance of diet and
nutrition as cancer reducers.

When it comes to deciding whether we should improve our lifestyles by
following the teachings of Dr. Max Gerson or sustain ourselves, if possible, on
snack chips, Danish pastries, pizza, cheeseburgers, ice cream, and other junk
foods, Gabriel Feldman, M.D., director of the prostate and colorectal cancer
programs for the American Cancer Society, admits, “We don’t need years of
research. If people would implement what we know today, cancer rates would
drop. It’s that simple.”

Dr. Max Gerson was correct in his medical/ nutritional literary presentation
of 1958 before the advent of fast food restaurants and supermarket convenience
foods, and his intuitions are even more accurate today.

References for Chapter Four

1. Quoted in Walters, R. Options: The Alternative Cancer Therapy Book
Garden City Park, N.Y.: Avery Publishing Group, 1992, pp. 189, 190.

2. Hildenbrand, G. “Bread, propaganda, and circuses.” Gerson Healing
Newsletter. 4( 18/19): 1, March/June 1987.

3. Foster, H.D. “Lifestyle changes and the ‘spontaneous’ regression of can-
cer: an initial computer analysis.” International Journal of Biosocial Research. 10(
1): 17—33, 1988.

4. Gerson, M. A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases. Summanizing 30 Years
of Climeal Practice and Experimentation. The Powerful Nutritional Therapy that Has
Healed Thousands. Bonita, Calif: The Gerson Institute, 1958, pp. 22-24.

5. Ibid., pp. 27-28.
Chapter Five

REMISSION—HOW IT
HAPPENS

We should be paying more attention to the exceptional patients, those
who get well unexpectedly, instead of staring bleakly at all those who
die in the usual pattern. In the words of René Dubos, “Sometimes the
more measurable drives out the most important.” Bernie B. Siegel,
MLD., in Love, Medicine anid Miracles

CURE OF LYMPHOMA BY USE OF THE GERSON THERAPY

Practicing as a chiropractor since 1955 in Amarillo, Texas, John Albracht, D.C.,
now age sixty-six, first underwent surgery for the removal of mixed-cell
lymphoma in 1963. The laparotomy, performed then by surgeon Charles Y. Mayo
Jr, M.D., son of the Mayo Clinic’s famous founder, uncovered an irregular
retroperitoneal tumor pushing up through the mesentery of the small bowel. Dr.
Albracht’s cancer was so large and extensive that it was considered inoperable,
and Dr. Mayo Jr. merely closed up the incision. He sent his patient to receive
twenty fractions of cobalt radiotherapy.

Following Dr. Albracht’s radiation treatments, his residual mass shrank
rapidly. At the time of his initial biopsy and laparotomy, Dr. Albracht was thirty
years old.

He remained in remission for twenty-four years. On December 1, 1986,
however, Dr. Albracht had a recurrence of multiple discomforting signs and
symptoms of malignant disease. They consisted of severe gastrointestinal
bleeding, excessive sweating (diaphoresis), muscle weakness, gastrointestinal
gas, belching, indigestion, epigastric fullness, diarrhea, tachycardia, a low
hemoglobin reading of 8 g/dL (normal is 14-18 g/dL), and a low packed red cell
volume in blood (hematocrit) of 26 mL/dL (normal is 40-54 mL/dL). Four days
later at the High Plains Baptist Hospital
in Amarillo, gastrointestinal surgeon Gregorio Matos, M.D., performed a small-
bowel resection with end-to-end anastomosis on the patient. The lymphoma
involved one-third of the small bowel and extended to the mesothelium,
including the whole jejunum down to the proximal ileum Indeed, along with 7
feet of small bowel, the malignant tumor removed from Dr. Albracht's belly was
r\emission— now 11 Happens

the size of a cantaloupe.

Recommended followup by oncologist Karim Nawaz, M_D., was with massive
amounts of five potent cytotoxic agents for a minimum of eight chemotherapies
starting January 11,1987. The patient tolerated two chemo treatments, but their
adverse side effects were so awful—nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal
cramping, severe abdominal pain, irritation, hoarseness, chest pains, shortness of
breath, coughing, pain in the lower back, pain in the testicles, burning and
swelling of both arms where the chemotherapy injections were placed, and a
serious weight loss of 55 pounds in three weeks—that he voluntarily
discontinued them.

“Dr. Matos used my case as a luncheon case study at the High Plains Baptist
Hospital here. He told his study group that I had maybe three to six months to
live,” said Dr. Albracht.1

That's when this patient, still filled with abdominal disease, entered the
Gerson Therapy hospital in Tijuana, Mexico, on February 17, 1987. Dr. Matos and
Dr. Nawaz continued to monitor his progress. They observed that his tumor
mass, just to the right of the umbilicus, shrank steadily from 4 cm by 7 cm to
nothing. By the close of 1987, with Dr. Albracht still following the Gerson dietary
treatment for cancer, his mass was no longer detectable using any type of medical
diagnostic method. The two conservative Amarillo cancer specialists,
investigating the patient by use of lymphangiograms, bone marrow tests,
laboratory tests, physical examinations, and more, considered him cured then
and still do now.

Dr. Matos said to Dr. Albracht, “The way you were going downhill, your
health was deteriorating. And I think you did the right things to bring your
health back up, and your weight and strength, and to get some sunshine.” Even
now, Dr. John Albracht continues to maintain his Gerson Therapy eating and
detoxification program. He still goes for regular five- month, follow-up checkups
by Dr. Matos.?

Since his successful employment of the Gerson Therapy for reversing deadly
malignant lymphoma, Dr. Albracht currently incorporates diet and nutrition into
his practice of chiropractic. He admits to having used the Gerson dietary
program as the sole means for saving and preserving his life. Yet some
uninformed medical observers who are biased in favor of drug or radiation
therapies may point to the patient's cured cancer and
58 THE GERSON THERAPY

comment with disdain, “Oh, that’s just an example of a cancer’s spontaneous
regression.” But Dr. John Albracht, whose life had been teetering in the balance,
knows the truth. There was no spontaneity to his cancer regression. He worked
hard to achieve it in 1987 and now continues to do so every day (see the
photograph of Dr. Albracht with his wife).

THERE IS NO “SPONTANEOUS REMISSION” OF CANCER

In chapter 4, we briefly quoted from an article regarding cancer remission for
patients resulting from lifestyle improvements. The information came from a
study conducted by Harold D. Foster, B.Sc., Ph.D., Professor of Geography and a
statistician with the University of Victoria in Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.
In 1988, Dr. Foster performed a thorough

Dr. and Mrs. John Albracht
computer analysis of cancer patients who underwent so-called spontaneous
regressions.

Spontaneous regression (or spontaneous remission) means that the cancer gets
smaller or disappears completely (and with no new tumors developing) without
any conventional treatment.?

The renowned pathologist William Boyd, M_D., collected a large series of such
Remission — How It Happens 59

instances, all documented in great detail, in a book he published in 1961. Dr.
Boyd estimated that approximately 1 in every 100,000 cases of cancer will show
spontaneous regression. In his series, more than half of the proven cases of
spontaneous regression came from four forms of tumor: (1) kidney (renal-cell)
cancer, (2) melanoma (pigmented cancer of the skin), (3) neuroblastoma (a rare
cancer of childhood), and (4) choriocarcinoma (a rare cancer of the placenta). As
part of the other half of Dr. Boyd’s cases, there were one or two examples of
almost every other type of cancer.4

In his classic coauthored textbook Spontaneous Regression of Cancer, oncologist
W H. Cole, M.D., writes: “The term ‘spontaneous’ is an erroneous classification
because there must be a cause of the regression.”5 Also, in his published writings
and lectures, Max Gerson, M_D., has stated repeatedly that cancer regression does
not happen spontaneously but that some specific improvement in the patient's
physiology causes the cancer to react favorably.

“What is missing, therefore/’ says Harold D. Foster, Ph.D., “is an under-
standing on the part of those involved of why a major improvement in health is
occurring.” A wide variety of possible explanations have, of course, been put
forward for spontaneous regression.”°

Spontaneous Cancer Regression Analyzed by
Dr. Harold Foster

Dr. Foster looked at the data on 200 recovered patients who had used various
forms of alternative treatment, including the Gerson Therapy, Hoxsey’s herbs,
Kelley's dietary program, macrobiotics, the Moerman diet, and Jason Winters
Herbal Tea. He discovered that more than half of these recovered chronic disease
patients (with cancer striking most of them) had used some form of nutrition and
lifestyle changes, including detoxification, such as coffee enemas, castor oil
enemas, high colonic irrigation, dry heat saunas, or fasting. Eighty-eight percent
of the patients had incorporated vegetarianism as their daily eating program, and
65 percent swallowed daily amounts of mineral supplements, with potassium
and iodine being the most frequently taken. Additional nutrients ingested by
them included niacin, digestive enzymes, bioflavonoids, red clover, and the
vitamins A, Bj2, and C.

Dr. Foster wrote that “spontaneous” cancer regressions “tended to occur most
frequently in vegetarian nonsmokers, who did not use table salt, white flour, or
sugar and who avoided canned, smoked, or frozen foods. Typically such
individuals eschewed alcoholic beverages, tea, coffee, and cocoa, but instead
drank freshly pressed fruit and/or vegetable juices. Many took vitamin and
mineral supplements together with various herbs. The time interval spent by
patients eating such special diets varied from one month to fifteen years, the
median time period being forty-one months.”

Since there must always be a reason for cancer regression, confirmed Dr.
60 THE GERSON THERAPY

Foster, he agreed with Dr. Max Gerson’s original finding, saying, “There is really
no such process as spontaneous regression.” The data support his view that
dramatic remissions occur “in association with major dietary changes, which
must inevitably have resulted in alterations in the availability of bulk and trace
elements to both the immune system and to tumors.”

Dr. Foster affirmed that the Gerson therapy program was heavily represented
among those cancer patients “who exceeded their anticipated lengths of survival
by at least a factor of ten.” In this group were persons who followed the Gerson
protocol and recovered from brain tumors, lymphosarcoma, basal cell carcinoma,
kidney sarcoma, spreading melanoma, breast cancer, spinal cord tumor,
metastasized testicular cancer, and pituitary gland cancer. Recovered patients
following the Gerson program were represented in nearly every category in Dr.
Foster's study.®

The U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the Canadian Cancer Society
(CCS) are promoting diets that they anticipate will reduce the incidence of
cancer. Interestingly enough, many of the 200 patients who experienced cancer
regression in Dr. Foster’s study were following diets exactly like that advocated
by Max Gerson, M.D. They were extreme forms of those now being championed
by orthodox medicine, as represented by the NCI and the CCS.°1°

Creating “Spontaneous Regressions/Remissions”

Alternative methods of healing (considered unconventional by the standards
of modern oncology) were applied by those investigated patients who
experienced spontaneous regressions.
Remission — How It Happens 61

TABLE 5-1
Percentage Frequency with Which Particular Foods and Drinks Were Avoided by 200
Cancer Victims Who Underwent “Spontaneous
Regressions"

Type of Food or Drink Percentage of Patient Sample

All canned foods 80.0
All frozen foods 80.0
All smoked foods 80.0
White sugar 795
Meat 795
Pickles 755
Table salt (sodium chloride) 755
Alcoholic beverages 755
Spices 75.0
Eges 70.0
Fish 67.0
Fats 65.5
White flour 65.5
Tea 65.5
Coffee 65.5
Chocolate 63.5
Oils 62.0
Milk 62.0
Nuts 59.5
Soybeans 49.0
Tomatoes 38.5
Shellfish 16.0

(Taken with permission from Foster, H.D. “Lifestyle changes and the
‘spontaneous’ regres

sion of cancer: An initial computer analysis." /nternational Journal of Biosocial
Research. 10( 1): 17-33, 1988.

Of the recorded patients, 175 (87.5 percent) had made major improvements
in their diets. Table 5-1 lists the foods which were typically avoided. As can be
seen, these now healthy people closely followed the Gerson Therapy dietary
recommendations (see chapters 7, 8, and 10). Eliminated from their meal
planning were alcoholic, fatty, oily, dairy, canned, frozen, smoked, sweet,
salted, spiced, and pickled foods. Eighty percent of the people who cured
various cancers on their own discontinued eating these foods. In addition,
tobacco, meat, and sugar were no longer ingested by 79.5 percent of the
patients who later underwent
inr, otKSUIN IHEKAPY

TABLE 5-2

Percentage Frequency with Which Particular Foods and Drinks Were
Consumed by 200 Cancer Patients Experiencing "Spontaneous

Regressions’
Type of Food or Drink Percentage of Patient Sample
Broccoli 84.5
Leeks 845
Cauliflower 84.5
Onions 845
Legumes 845
Carrots 84.5
Brussels sprouts 84.5
Beet roots 825
Squash 82.5
Apples 81.5
Pears 81.5
Apricots 770
Whole grain cereals 75.0
Cantaloupe 735
Grapes 73.0
Tomatoes 725
Lentils 69.0
Grapefruit juice (freshly made) 58.0
Alfalfa and other sprouted seeds 575
Orange juice (freshly made) 57.0
Apple juice (freshly made) 57.0
Grape juice (freshly made) 55.0
Tomato juice (freshly made) 55.0
Carrot juice (freshly made) 53.5
Green leaf juice (freshly made) 515
Liver 465
Raisins 46.5
Almonds 32.0
Pineapples 26.0
Cottage cheese 245
Buttermilk (churned, nofcultured) 245
Eggs 245
Wheatgrass. 22.0
Yogurt 21.0
Olive oil 20.5
Sunflower seeds 19.5
Barley grass 18.5
Avocados 18.5
Kefir 16.5

Garlic 14.0
Remission— How It Happens 68
TABLE 5-2 (cont.)

Flax oil 75
Miso 45
Tamari 2.0

(Taken with permission from Foster, H.D. “Lifestyle changes and the
‘spontaneous’ regression of cancer: an initial computer analysis.”
Intemational Journal of Biosocial Research. 10( 1): 17-33, 1988.

“spontaneous” cancer regressions. As indicated below, spices, eggs, fish, oils and
fats, tea, coffee, cocoa, chocolate, white flour, milk, and nuts were avoided as well
by more than 50 percent of the patients.

In contrast, certain foods were consumed in large quantities by cancer patients
seemingly undergoing “spontaneous regression.” These are shown in Table 5-2.
The most popular foods valued for their anticancer components proved to be
fresh vegetables; namely carrots, beet roots, squash, broccoli, leeks, cauliflower,
onions, legumes, and brussels sprouts. Such vegetables were the only foods
specifically eaten by more than 80 percent of the spontaneously regressed
patients. Also of note was that 57 percent of these fortunate (or informed) people
followed the Gerson Therapy recommendation of freshly pressing and drinking
apple, carrot, and orange juices. Freshly squeezed carrot juice, in fact, played a
significant role in the diets of 53.5 percent of all patients in the sample.
Grapefruit, grape, and tomato juices were also drunk by over half of those
experiencing regressions. Other foods that were popular included whole grains,
alfalfa sprouts, cantaloupes, tomatoes, lentils, grapes, and apricots.

SURVIVING AND THRIVING FORTY YEARS
AFTER THE GERSON THERAPY

There is no shortage of confirmations that dietary improvements combined
with detoxifying lifestyles help to eliminate cancer and other illnesses manifested
by total cellular deterioration. Such confirmations include the statements of
patients still living forty or more years after they had undergone the healing
program advocated by Max Gerson, M.D. What follows is just such an example
of surviving and thriving more than
forty-two years after engaging in the Gerson Therapy to counteract bone cancer.

Carla Shuford (see photograph) is happy and healthy today, more than forty-
two years after she was diagnosed with the metastatic cancer osteogenic sarcoma,
at age fifteen.

Osteogenic sarcoma, a cancer of the bone tissue itself, is the second most
common type of primary malignant bone tumor. Although most often seen in
64 THE GERSON THERAPY

people aged ten to twenty years, an osteosarcoma of this type can occur at any
age. About half of the tumors occur in or around the knee and within the femur,
but they can originate in any bone. They tend to spread as secondary growths to
the lungs. Usually, osteogenic sarcoma causes severe pain and swelling at the
tumor sites.12

Carla Shuford was a victim of the disease but saved herself with the powerful
nutritional and detoxification program advocated by Dr. Gerson. To help save the
lives of other childhood cancer patients, she wrote her case history for publication
in the bimonthly July/ August 1998 issue of the Gerson Healing Newsletter:12

Here is Carla Shuford’s story:

This year, on September 4, 1998,1 will be celebrating my fortieth anniversary —
an anniversary of life! 1 was diagnosed with cancer, and on that day forty years
ago, my left leg was amputated at the hip. I had gone through seven months of
pain before the tumor was discovered, so when the diagnosis of osteogenic
sarcoma was confirmed in a biopsy report to John Preston, M.D. (the surgeon
who had performed the biopsy), the prognosis was not good. The cancer had
spread to my lymph system, and I was given six months to live.

At that time [early September 1958], radiation and surgery were the
conventional methods of treatment. Radiation was not possible because of the
tumor’s location, and in desperation, the doctors decided to do radical surgery,
offering a faint possibility that it could postpone my death by thirty to sixty
days.
Remission — How It Happens 65

However, on the same day, and in fact, while the operation was being
performed, something seemingly much less dramatic, but far more vital was
taking place. My mother was talking [in person] to Dr. Max Gerson in his New
York City office, making arrangements for me to begin his therapy immediately
upon my hospital discharge.

The next five years were to be round-the-clock days of labor, as my parents
devoted their lives to preserving mine, Gerson-style. We were poor dairy
farmers from the mountains of western North Carolina, whose livelihood
depended upon milking by hand our herd of thirty Jersey cows, and delivering
the raw milk to our customers each morning.

Although it would have been preferable for me to be a resident of Dr.
Gerson’s New York clinic, circumstances made that impossible. Because of the
extreme demands of time, energy, and the difficulty of acquiring toxin-free
foods, along with the thoroughness and exactness that the program required,
Dr. Gerson was reluctant for patients to handle the treatment at home, especially
in the beginning stages. However, he was impressed with my mother’s
intelligence and untiring dedication to detail. In return for his trust, she made
him the promise that she would follow his prescribed regimen to the letter.

So began five years of uncompromising observance to the Gerson Therapy by
my mother, my father, and myself. In those days, the Gerson juicer was an
enormously heavy machine (similar to a carjack), with a separate press and
linen cloths to press the ground food in to prevent any chance of oxidation. We
were all grateful that our arms had grown strong from years of milking cows, as
it required equal strength to operate this equipment! As the juice had to be
freshly ground and pressed with each
66 THE GERSON THERAPY

feeding, my mother barely finished washing the machine and cloths, before it
was time for the next round.

At that time too, the liver “juice” consisted of the liquid from grinding and
pressing a calf’s liver that had never been frozen. Our nearest source for the
liver was in Asheville, forty miles away. My father’s job was to meet the bus
at 3:00 pm. at the local station with our order of fresh liver.

While my father had converted to organic gardening in the early 1950s,
none of the other local farmers had any interest in this pursuit. However,
since the quantities of lettuce and carrots required for daily juicing, as well as
the various roots and vegetables for the prescribed soup, were enormous [for
me], my father needed the assistance of our neighbors. Different farmers
agreed to allocate portions of their gardens to be pesticide-free. In those areas,
they grew “Carla’s carrots” and “Carla’s lettuce” and “Carla’s whatever.”

The rest is history. Dr. Gerson died in the spring of 1959, less than six
months after my mother had visited him. The doctors finally grew tired of
requiring monthly chest X-rays that were consistently clear. Sloan- Kettering
[Cancer Clinic] sent out a yearly survey to ask if I was still alive, and each
year, to their amazement, it was returned. In 1988, I realized I had outlived
their thirty-year study!

My father died in 1965. My mother died on January 18 of this year (1998),
just three days before her ninetieth birthday. I am now an official senior,
having turned fifty-five in April.

leat only organic, unprocessed foods, with an emphasis on fruits, veg-
etables, and whole grains. I swim a mile each morning, and enjoy good
health—other than the wear-and-tear that is attendant to a forty-year life on
crutches.

I keep an updated “Gerson Folder” in my bureau drawer, so I will know
what to do, should I ever need Doctor Max's help again. And perhaps most
importantly, I look forward to celebrating my fortieth anniversary on
September 4, 1998, as I once again give thanks to my mother, to my father,
and to Dr. Max Gerson for MY LIFE!

Carla Shuford
Part Two

THE GERSON
THERAPY IN
ACTION
Chapter Six

HEALING MELANOMA WITH
THE GERSON THERAPY

W hen a death-dealing skin cancer, melanoma, reaches the state of having
spread, or metastasized, throughout the body, it is classified as a stage
IV cancer. Such a circumstance is serious, unquestionably life- threatening, and
carries no optimistic prognosis among conventionally practicing oncologists.

A melanoma (literally “black tumox’) is a malignant mole, the most
dangerous of all skin cancers and among the most malignant of all cancers. It
can spread to nearly every organ and tissue and lead to death within a year
after it recurs in distant sites (metastasizes). Although it is rare for a pregnant
woman’s tumor to spread to her fetus (see the case of Lana Matuseck near the
conclusion of this chapter), melanomas lead the list among those tumors that
do spread in this way.

Melanoma is most common in people in their forties to sixties. While not yet
among the most common cancers, its incidence is rising faster worldwide than
any other. In the United States alone, more than 40,300 cases occurred in 1997,
and an even higher number are being counted for 1998.

Only one type of cell composing all melanomas exists—the malevolent
pigment-producing cell called a melanocyte—but there are a few variants
distinguished by their shapes, such as cuboidal or spindle-shaped. The be-
havior of each is generally similar in skin melanomas, although in eye
melanomas their shape determines the behavior to a significant degree.1
72 THE GERSON THERAPY

Mrs. DAEL MINTZ ARRIVES WITH STAGE IV MELANOMA

Arriving at a natural remedy hospital using the Gerson Therapy in Tijuana,
Mexico, in June 1993, Dael Mintz, aged fifty-five, of Calabasas, California, had
her life endangered by stage IV melanoma. Mrs. Mintz defied all the
conventional medical odds. “Frankly, at the outset, we here at the Gerson
Therapy treatment center in Tijuana thought that her prognosis was rather
poor,” admits Alicia Melendez, M.D., the Gerson Therapy-educated physician
who specializes in treating cancers holistically.

“She had a severe case of metastasized melanoma, with tumor masses in her
lungs and liver and lesions engulfing and compressing her mid-back and neck
vertebrae. Dael’s largest tumor measured 11.5 centimeters [cm] across; there
was a mass of lumps just under the skin on her chest, and she had a tumor on
her nose as well,” relates Dr. Melendez. “Surgery followed by a skin graft had
been unable to eliminate the nose tumor, and soon it grew to the size of a
grape. A total of twenty tumors were found throughout her body (including
her hip, spine, liver, bones, and kidneys) and her clavicle was visibly distended
with clear signs of the cancer.”

Conventionally practicing oncologists in California had given up on Mrs.
Mintz. In fact, they predicted that she had less than six months to live. When
melanoma is that far advanced, there is almost nothing regular drug-oriented
(allopathic) medicine can do. Stage IV melanoma is resistant to radiation
treatment, immunotherapy, and chemotherapy. None of these established
procedures has been shown to bring about any good long-term results. All
oncologists will tell you that stage IV skin cancer is among the most difficult
malignancies to overcome. But it turns out that this was not the situation for
Dael Mintz.

Over the next three weeks at the Gerson Therapy facility and then for
eighteen months on her own, Mrs. Mintz followed the standard Gerson
program of eating a specialized diet, consuming fresh vegetable juices, taking
nutritional supplements, receiving remedial injections, going through
detoxification, and giving herself coffee enemas. In addition, she received
ozone topically for her nose lesions and took it rectally twice daily for general
body detoxification. At the end of this three-week period, the patient still
showed some lesions in and on her body, but she felt a great deal more energy.
Overall, the Gerson Therapy doctors and staff evaluated her as being well on
the road to recovery. She then returned home to treat herself.2
Healing Melanoma with the Gerson Therapy 73

STAGE IV MELANOMA REMISSION, REGRESSION, AND

ELIMINATION

Dr. Melendez acknowledges that the severity of her patient's case was of
great concern at first. “Her health at the time she had been admitted to our
clinic was like a train plummeting down a mountain with an engineer who has
had a heart attack. The melanoma was that far out of control. We needed to
stop the train and push it back up the mountain,” states the Gerson Therapy
cancer specialist.

Within the next six months of her remaining on the Gerson program, Mrs.
Mintz’s clavicle returned to a normal appearance. After another six months,
computerized axial tomography (CAT) scans she went through as a diagnostic
procedure indicated that there was a substantial size reduction in her liver
tumors; the scans also showed that most other organ metastases had
disappeared. The woman's next CAT scan, six months later still (a year and a
half from the start of her Gerson self-treatment), depicted a continued
reduction in the liver tumor and only two (out of an initial five) lung tumors
remained.

One year later, in June 1996, there were only two calcified nodules on her
left lung and a single, 1-millimeter calcification on the right lobe of her liver
remained. She was in remission, near to total regression, and approaching the
end stage of complete elimination of her stage IV melanoma. This not
uncommon occurrence for Gerson Therapy patients was confirmed repeatedly
in two ways: by Dael Mintz consulting with her local oncologist and by return
visits to the Gerson treatment center in Tjuana.

“Between June 1993 and June 1996, the tumor on her nose flattened out,
developed a concave area in its center, and lightened in color,’ reported the
patient's Mexican physician during the season that followed. “Dael feels very
healthy, despite the lingering lesion on her nose. This last lesion, too, is
drastically reduced from its original size and she believes it is gradually
healing.”

After the patient was on the Gerson program for two years, Dr. Alicia
Melendez was able to pronounce her “almost completely clear of any cancer.”
Bearing in mind that the average life expectancy for someone with stage IV
melanoma is under one year in almost all cases, for the patient still to still be
alive to this point for seven years is highly impressive (see the photograph
showing Mrs. Dael Mintz today).

At home in Calabasas, when Mrs. Mintz reported her recovery to her allopathic
oncologist, he was “thunderstruck and amazed,” she says. “He
74 THE GERSON THERAPY

Mrs. Dael Mintz

was completely unable to understand what produced this turnaround in my
presumably fatal melanoma. Fortunately, my oncologist had enough sense to
encourage me to remain on the Gerson Therapy.” She consults him periodically
to confirm that melanoma is staying away.

We have described this deadly stage IV melanoma ease history because Dael
Mintz’s skin cancer with its multiple metastases is even worse than most of the
other melanomas studied as part of a broad-based retrospective investigation.
We discuss the research below. A retrospective investigation or review is one
that surveys past performance of some therapy. This examination reviewed
how many melanoma patients lived at least five years (considered a “cure” by
the American Cancer Society's oncological scientists).

The retrospective study reported here compared melanoma patients who
first began the Gerson Therapy under medical supervision and then, like Mrs.
Mintz, went on to self-administer the treatment at home. Our described
melanoma patient and 152 other study participants who followed the Gerson
Therapy with enthusiasm (153 in all) did exceedingly well regarding their five-
year survival rates. Among them, 69 percent of the Gerson Therapy patients
lived beyond five years. They were compared with those other melanoma
patients taken from the medical literature (16,229 in all) who had undergone
different courses of treatment. It’s readily seen that the non-Gerson Therapy
patients were less fortunate and died in greater numbers before the five-year
mark (usually within a year).
Healing Melanoma with the Gerson Therapy 75

THE MELANOMA RETROSPECTIVE REVIEW OF FIVE-YEAR

SURVIVAL

The melanoma study was conducted by members of the Gerson Institute
and the Cancer Prevention and Control Program at the University of California,
both located in San Diego. This retrospective review described all patients,
including nonresponders to therapy, and encompassed their melanomas in
stages I and II (localized), stages 111A and IIIB (regionally metastasized), stage
IVA (distant lymph, skin, and subcutaneous tissue metastases), and stage IVB
(visceral metastases). A peer- reviewed clinical journal article, “Five-Year
Survival Rates of Melanoma Patients Treated by Diet Therapy after the Manner
of Gerson: A Retrospective Review,” was published in September 1995.3

The article’s authors, G. L. Hildenbrand, L. Christeene Hildenbrand, Karen
Bradford, and Shirley W Cavin, summarized the clinical outcomes of
melanoma patients treated with the nutrition-based cancer therapy in contrast
with outcome rates reported in the medical literature. Over a fifteen-year
period—-from 1975 through July 1990—153 adult, white melanoma patients
treated with the nutrition-based cancer therapy developed by Max Gerson,
MLD. (who originally conducted his research at the University of Munich in the
1930s), were evaluated retrospectively. Although he published the results of his
dietary program in Europe, Dr. Gerson publicized his findings even more
extensively after 1936 when he immigrated to the United States.4

The Gerson Therapy melanoma patients studied ranged from twenty- five to
seventy-two years of age. The Gerson program participants were treated with a
lacto-vegetarian, low-sodium, low-fat, and low-protein diet. They received
elevated amounts of potassium, fluid, and nutrients in the form of hourly
administered eight-ounce glasses of raw vegetable juices and/or fruit juices.
Their metabolism was increased by thyroid. The calorie supply was limited to
from 2,600 to 3,200 calories per day. Coffee enemas as needed for
dexotification, pain relief, and improvement of appetite were taken.

A few of the melanoma patients had been treated by private practice
physicians, but almost all had been hospitalized at some facility providing the
Gerson Therapy in the Tijuana area of Mexico. (Patient records were examined
from four different Tijuana hospitals.)

This retrospective review revealed that 100 percent of the 14 Gerson Therapy
Patients (GTP) with melanoma stages I and II survived for five
76 THE; GERSON THERAPY

years, compared with only 79 percent living that long of 15,798 stages I and II
melanoma patients reported by oncologist C. M. Balch, M.D.°

Of 17 GTP with stage IIIA (regionally metastasized) melanoma, 82 percent
were alive at five years, in contrast to just 39 percent of 103 stage IIA
melanoma patients taking therapy dispensed by the German health facility
Fachklinik Hornheide.®

Of 33 GTP with stages IIIA plus IIIB melanoma, 71 percent lived five years,
compared with 41 percent of 134 stages IIIA plus IIIB melanoma patients from
the Fachklinik Hornheide.”

Of 18 GTP with stage IVA melanoma, 39 percent were alive at five years,
compared with a mere 6 percent of 194 stage IVA melanoma patients from the
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group.®

Of 71 GTP not recorded statistically, after exclusions, the 153 total number of
five-year survivors turned out to be clearly stage-related. Some patients were
lost to follow-up because they died from causes other than melanoma or
moved out of contact with the researchers and could not be reached.

The American Cancer Society has reported a 39 percent five-year survival
rate for stage III melanoma.? Yet the assessable survival rate in stage II
melanoma patients treated with Dr. Max Gerson’s diet therapy is 71 percent.

Male and female survival rates were identical for stages I, II, ILA, and IIB
melanoma, but stage IVA melanoma women (such as Dael Mintz) had a strong
survival advantage over men. Survival impact was not assessed for stage IVB
melanoma.

Various aspects of the Gerson Therapy program have been designated as the
theoretical reasons for patient success against disease, yet no clearly defined
mechanism has been identified. As will be understood from the chapters to
follow, components of the Gerson Therapy program are dedicated to an
improved oxidation process of the sick patient's cellular structures. Under this
procedure, to more properly treat cancer and other degenerative diseases, the
oxidation function must be increased markedly.

It generally goes unrecognized by medical consumers that chronic illnesses
replaced infectious diseases as the dominant public health issue in the 1920s,
long before antibiotics appeared on the scene. There is a global pattern of
chronic ill health related in particular to wrongly applied nutritional factors.
The Gerson Therapy effectively corrects those human internal environmental
factors which have gone awry.

The first National Health Survey conducted in 1935 reported that 22 percent
of Americans lived with a chronic condition of illness.12 In 1987, nearly 30
percent of the population (upwards of 90 million Americans) suffered from one
or more chronic conditions.15 Based on trends during the preceding and
succeeding decades, some 50 percent of the American population (perhaps 150
Healing Melanoma with the Gerson Therapy 77

million people) are expected to be counted among the chronically ill before the
year 2000 ends. These considerations are pertinent to Gerson Therapy. It is a
main method for the permanent elimination of chronic degenerative diseases of
all types but especially for the one hundred or more types of cancer.

Please note that the Medicare system’s state of finances desperately needs
the Gerson Therapy since in the Medicare program, more than 10 percent of
beneficiaries consume about 72 percent of medical resources. That high
percentage of chronically ill took up massive amounts of taxpayer money in
1998 and the situation is anticipated to worsen in each successive year. 4

JULIE HEPNER HAS HER MELANOMA

ELIMINATED BY THE GERSON THERAPY

Julie Hepner’s good health ended in 1988 when she was only twenty- two
years old. A mole was removed from her right shoulder by a dermatologist,
and the biopsy he conducted determined that she had a melanoma. In the next
four years Julie underwent seven surgical operations to remove a lump from
her neck, a tumor from her brain, a cyst from her ovary, flesh from her tonsil,
and 1 1/2 feet of colon. On each occasion, biopsies found melanoma.

After undergoing the colon surgery, Julie began the Gerson Therapy with
assistance from her mother and regular consultations with metabolic
physicians practicing medicine near her location who employ the Gerson
Therapy. Despite a minor setback in 1993 when she moved into a newly
painted and carpeted home and experienced environmental allergies, Julie has
felt “great.” This former melanoma patient has encountered no further
recurrences of melanoma and to this day remains on a less intensive Gerson
Therapy program. (See the photo on the next page, which pictures Julie Hepner
as she looks today, eleven years after she was diagnosed with melanoma.)
78 THE GERSON THERAPY

Julie Ilepner

CAROL ASKHEW HEALS MELANOMA, ARTHRITIS, AND

CHRONIC HEPATITIS C

Carol Askhew turned to the Gerson Therapy to deal with three different
illnesses, beginning with arthritis, which had left both her father and her sister
with multiple hip replacements. Although arthritis did affect her and was
cured by application of the Gerson Therapy, melanoma was this woman’s more
serious health problem Melanoma was what brought Carol to adopting the
Gerson diet and detoxification metabolic program.

Her cancer happened after her father was diagnosed with melanoma. Carol
became frightened for herself and had a biopsy performed on a lesion that had
been frozen off several times before. When the results indicated melanoma,
Carol Askhew entered a hospital administering the Gerson Therapy where she
stayed for two weeks. She thrived on the pro-
Healing Melanoma with the Gerson Therapy 79

Carol Askhew

gram for as long as she followed it at home. Her arthritis and melanoma
disappeared and have stayed away.

Then, in December 1995, a liver biopsy she required for the infection then
invading her body indicated that this patient had stage III hepatitis

C. Once again Carol Askhew returned to self-application of the Gerson
Therapy and performed in accordance with its requirements. Her liver en-
zymes subsequently came back to normal levels where they remain today. Her
health continues to improve. (See the above photograph, which shows how
Carol Askhew looks today.)

Carol Askhew makes the following series of health-enhancing statements:
“There's nothing like losing your health to inspire you to do something to
preserve it.”

“Cancer is a symptom. Treat the cause.”

“The Gerson Therapy saved my life.”

“On the Gerson Therapy, I feel like I just get better and better.”
80 THE GERSON THERAPY

KATHLEEN MONAGHAN ELIMINATES THE DEADLIEST FORM OF
MELANOMA

After a mole and some lymph nodes were removed from her right arm, Mrs.
Kathleen Monaghan was diagnosed with malignant melanoma, level IVB, the
deadliest known form of skin cancer. Within a year, the melanoma had
metastasized to her liver and adrenal glands where an additional tumor had
developed. The patient's physicians then told the Monaghan family that she
had only thirty days to remain alive.

The four authors of the above-described five-year retrospective survival
survey made no attempt to assess the survival impact of the Gerson Therapy in
stage IVB, because they were unable to find a single comparable treatment
group worldwide moving through any treatment-reporting system In other
words, they did have stage IVB melanoma patients, all with gravely advanced
disease, but there was no group of such patients who lived long enough
anywhere else with which to make comparisons.

Despite family protests, Kathleen Monaghan entered a Gerson Therapy
facility located in Tijuana, Mexico, in October 1993. There she embarked on the
dietary / detoxification program with vigor and immediately felt rejuvenated.

MELANOMA OF THE EYE CURED BY USE OF THE GERSON
THERAPY

Recently Charlotte Gerson received a telephone call from a woman who
explained that she and her daughter had attended a Mexican cancer clinic that
employs the Gerson Therapy in 1982. The mother went as a support person for
her daughter, Lana Matuseck, aged twenty-six at the time. The daughter’s body
had paid the price for prolonged malnutrition during the time of her
pregnancy, a year before. At the time of their 1982 visit across the
Mexican/ American border, they had brought along her one-year-old baby boy.
During her period of pregnancy and beyond, Lana had been diagnosed with
ocular melanoma of the left eye at the prestigious Health Sciences Center of
Portland, Oregon.

Lana was lucky that, because of her pregnancy, she had not been treated
with chemotherapy; however, by the time her baby was a year old, the woman
had undergone seven surgical operations, each time to remove a quantity of the
spreading melanoma around her left eyeball. Even so,
additional melanoma tissue would appear in her eye socket, and each surgery
sought to remove some more of the malignant tissue. Success was limited and
the cancer kept returning.
Healing Melanoma with the Gerson Therapy 81

At the Gerson Institute, it is especially painful for staff members to hear
from young women such as Lana who are pregnant or with small children and
are suffering from some type of cancer. Unfortunately, this is not a rare
occurrence. In these situations, the same underlying physiological problems
connected with all malignancies exist: body deficiency and toxicity.

In contrast, it’s not possible for a healthy body to produce cancer. When all
defenses, especially the immune system, are in place, the healthy body will
naturally kill and eliminate cancer cells whenever or wherever they develop.
Before a cancer establishes itself and becomes evident, therefore, a person's
major immunological defenses weaken or disappear. Then one’s immune
system fails to work, the enzyme system becomes damaged, the pancreatic
enzymes stop destroying foreign proteins (tumor tissue), the hormone system
gets depleted, and minerals are lacking.

Lana and many other young women today have bodies that are just barely
maintaining balance and health under average conditions. However, when they
become pregnant, their bodies are called upon to produce an entirely new
person with its own organ system. This requirement puts a drain on a marginal
body, just barely functioning. Both the mother-to-be and her fetus then must
pay the elevated price of her chronic poor nourishment.

When the food intake contains the necessary ingredients (fresh, raw
vitamins, minerals, and enzymes in assimilable form rather than in phar-
maceutical preparations), the pregnant body receives the additional materials
to accomplish this job as it has for thousands of years. Still, we often see that
our modern typical American diet is seriously deficient in these live nutrients.
Instead, it puts additional strain on a pregnant woman’s body in the form of
excess fats, proteins, and salt, along with food chemicals such as preservatives,
dyes, emulsifiers, and worse.

Now comes the conundrunx nature always provides for the fetus, the new
life, and will build a perfectly good body for the baby-to-be from available
vitamins, minerals, and nutrients. If these are not being supplied to a woman in
the form of appropriate nutrition, nature will take these required materials for
the fetus out of the woman's already marginal body systems. Now the
minerals, enzymes and nutrients for the pregnant woman’s body become
seriously depleted. With immune system defenses
virtually gone, she manifests illness in the weakest part of her physiology. If the
depletion and toxicity are serious enough, the result is likely to be a
malignancy. Or, in other circumstances, illness might “only’ result in toxemia
of pregnancy, kidney trouble, genitourinary disorder, or some other internal
difficulty.

Originally all three of Lana’s medical doctors—an internist, an oph-
thalmologist, and an oncologist—concurred in a statement to her parents and
82 THE GERSON THERAPY

husband that she would not live five months. But Lana, against odds, had
exceeded that dire prediction. Nevertheless, the trio of doctors maintained to
the patient's mother that her daughter’s situation was “hopeless and that there
was nothing they could do to help stop the melanoma from killing her.” Also
they added that the type of treatment advocated on the Gerson program was “a
waste of time, money, and hardship on the family.”

By phone, Lana’s mother further told Charlotte Gerson that when she was
first seen by the Gerson Therapy physicians at the Mexican cancer clinic, the
patient's affected eye was totally blind. She looked at the world only out of her
right eye. But then, Lana Matuseck’s parent reported, her daughter followed
the Gerson Therapy faithfully. It was her only hope of recovery. Today, June 1,
1999, more than a decade and a half later, she is completely well and has been
that way for over a dozen years. Mrs. Lana Matuseck has since delivered three
more strong and healthy children, another boy and two girls. The whole
Matuseck family lives a lifestyle according to the principles of Dr. Max Gerson.

At forty-one years of age, the ex-melanoma patient needs no corrective
lenses and has full use of her vision in both eyes. Her formerly affected left eye
has come back to 20/20 vision simply because she refused to accept her three
conventionally practicing, allopathic physicians’ discouraging prognosis and
instead has been following the Gerson Therapy these past sixteen years.

References for Chapter Six

1. Mitchell, MS. “Melanoma.” In Everyone's Guide to Cancer Therapy., rev. 3rd
ed., by M. Dollinger; EH. Rosenbaum; and G. Cable, Kansas City, Missouri:
Andrews McMeel Publishing, 1997, pp. 568, 569.

2. Gerson, C. “Successfully reversing stage IV melanoma: the story of Dael
Mintz.” Healing Stones of the Gerson Therapy from the Alternative Medicine Digest.
Issue no. 18, May/June 1997.

3. Hildenbrand, G.L.; Hildenbrand, L.C.; Bradford, K.; Cavin, S.W. “Five-
year survival rates of melanoma patients treated by diet therapy after the
manner of Gerson: A retrospective review.” Alternative Therapies. 1 (4):29— 37,
September 1995.

4. Gerson, M. “Dietary considerations in malignant neoplastic disease;
preliminary report.” Rev. Gastroenterol. 12:419-425, 1945.

5. Balch, C.M. “Cutaneous melanoma: prognosis and treatment results
worldwide.” Semin Surg. Oncol. 8:400-414, 1992.

6. Drepper, H.; Beiss, B.; Hofherr, B.; et al. “The prognosis of patients with
stage III melanoma: prospective long-term study of 286 patients of the
Fachklinik Hornheide.” Cancer. 71:1239-1246, 1993.

7. Ibid

8. Ryan, L.; Kramar, A; Borden, E. “Prognostic factors in metastatic
Healing Melanoma with the Gerson Therapy 83

melanoma.” Cancer. 71:2995-3005, 1993.

9. Op. cit., Balch, C.M.

10.Ericson, R. Cancer Treatment: Why So Many Failures? Park Ridge, 111.:
GE-PS Cancer Memorial, 1979, p. 100.

11. Sydenstricker, E. “The vitality of the American people. In Recent Trends
in the United States. New York: McGraw-Hill Co., 1993, chap. 2.

12. Philband, C.T. National Health Survey: Preliminary Results. Washington,
D.C.: National Institutes of Health and the U.S. Public Health Service, 1937.

13. Hoffman, C.; Rice, D.; Sung, H.-Y. “Persons with chronic conditions.
Their prevalence and costs.” Journal of the Amencan Medical Association.
276:1473-1479, 1996.

14. Health Care Financing Administration. “Medicare: a profile.” Wash-
ington, D.C.: Health Care Financing Administration, February 1995, chart PS-
11.
84 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chapter Seven

SUCCESS WITH OTHER
DISEASES

L n this chapter, we will explore Dr. Max Gerson’s nutritional eating pro-
gram by relating some healing experiences of noncancerous Gerson
Therapy patients.

EPILEPSY CURED BY SELF-APPLICATION OF THE GERSON

THERAPY

By putting herself on the Gerson Therapy dietary program at home five
years ago, Dallas, Texas, schoolgirl Jessica Kahn, then sixteen years old, was
eventually able to permanently get rid of grand mal seizures. Epilepsy has
finally stopped ruining her life, and now she has blossomed into a beautiful
young woman who is active, vivacious, and completely recovered.

Epilepsy (falling sickness) is a chronic disorder characterized by paroxysmal
brain dysfunction due to excessive neuronal discharge and is usually associated
with some alteration of consciousness. The clinical manifestations of the
mind/brain attack may vary from complex abnormalities of behavior including
generalized or focal convulsions to momentary spells of impaired
consciousness. These clinical states have been subjected by health professionals
to a variety of classifications, none universally accepted to date among
psychiatrists, neurologists, and other
physicians who deal with mental and neurological processes of the disease.

Grand mal seizures cause the patient to fall to the ground unconscious with
Success with Other Diseases 85

his or her muscles in a state of spasm. The lack of any respiratory activity or
movement results in a bluish discoloration of the skin and lips (cyanosis). This
“tonic” phase is replaced by convulsive movements when an involved patient
may bite the tongue and urinary incontinence may occur (the “clonic” phase).
Spasmodic movements die away and the patient may rouse in a state of
confusion, complaining of headache, or he or she may fall asleep.

We asked Jessica Kahn to describe her health history. Here is what Ms.
Kahn wrote:

When I was sixteen years old, I began to have grand mal seizures. At first
they occurred once every three to four months, but my condition soon
deteriorated. Eventually I was experiencing two or three seizures at a time,
practically every week. Of course, they had me feeling depressed and
devastated.

My father has had a mild seizure disorder for the past twenty years, and
so I believed that my seizures were inherited and here to stay. I did consult
neurology specialists and took EEGs [electroencephalograms] looking for
my condition’s cause and cure, but none of the doctors could figure out
what was wrong. They didn’t offer me anything more than anti- convulsive
drugs. Not wanting to go down the orthodox medicine road and use toxic
treatment, my family and I searched and experimented with several
alternative therapies. All of them having failed, we decided to try the
Gerson program because we had seen it work miracles with friends of ours
who had once been affected by cancer.

I went completely on the program for eleven months; I was able to adjust
my school day and my lifestyle, and I did manage to accomplish all of the
juicing and purging required. Although my mother spoke to Charlotte
Gerson on the telephone a couple of times, we did the Gerson Therapy “by
the book.” That old book written by Dr. Max Gerson so long ago became my
bible—I memorized its pages word for word. During my eleven months on
the Gerson program, I experienced only three seizures. They coincided with
my anticipated healing crises, such as the one I went through after six weeks
at the start of the Gerson Therapy.

It has now been over four years since I stopped the treatment and over
five years since I experienced any kind of seizure! I am ever so grateful to
the Gerson program and also to my family for being so persistent in
searching out an epilepsy cure for me.

Jessica Kahn is graduating from college this spring and will be pursuing a
career in the health care sciences. The general nutrition information this young
woman acted upon as her road map to eliminating epilepsy and restoring
neurological health is readily usable by all persons for overcoming any illness
or for purposes of medical prevention.
86 THE GERSON THERAPY

PERMANENT RECOVERY FROM ADDICTIONS TO STREET DRUGS

AND ALCOHOL

As they grew up, fourteen-year-old Rob (pseudonym) and his siblings
engaged in a variety of antisocial activities. As a result, all three children
became either alcohol-addicted or street-drug-addicted and led relatively
unproductive lives. For example, Rob dropped out of high school early in his
junior year due to his frequent double abuses of alcoholic beverages and
marijuana. His mother, whose defeat of breast cancer you will learn about in
chapter 14, says that her son never really was a “healthy” child.

To illustrate his physical weaknesses, Rob’s mother describes his situation at
the age of five when he was suffering from a rare bone disorder called Legg-
Calve-Perthes disease. The illness manifests itself as a kind of perforation of
the rounded head of the femur, or thigh bone, which rotates against the hip.
When the woman first took her son for consultation with a physician, the M.D.
dismissed the child’s symptoms as “worries of an overly concerned mother.”
But she insisted on an X-ray examination of the boy’s legs and hips, which
confirmed the disease.

Embarrassed that he had missed the diagnosis, this physician advised her to
take Rob for experimental treatment then ongoing at the University of
California. But the mother refused to allow her child to be used as a human
guinea pig. Rob did, however, need to wear a full leg cast from below the knee
to his groin for months. During the course of such treatment, his mother
describes how she learned about nutritional therapy, massage therapy, and
reflexology “accidentally.” She read about them while shopping in a health
foods store. These and other holistic-type alternative methods of healing were
subsequently utilized to treat Rob’s Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Medical care
alternatives including dietary modifications, and not usual “orthodox’
medicine, enabled the small boy to discard his long leg cast and recover
naturally and permanently.

So, remembering their effectiveness for his leg and hip, Rob elected to use the

diet and detoxification techniques of medical alternatives to clean
up his body when he and his new wife considered having a baby. As it hap-
pens, he had married a girl who also used street drugs and alcohol to excess.
The couple had watched while Rob’s mother went through the Gerson Therapy
program for curing her breast cancer, and the son was much admiring of his
mother’s personal healing efforts. He, but not his wife, therefore became an
enrollee in the Tijuana, Mexico, hospital facility which then employed the
Gerson Therapy.

In a matter of just a few weeks, Rob was completely free of his dependency
on both alcohol and marijuana, with no withdrawal problems of any kind. He
returned home “cleaned up” and told his wife that he was now ready to
Success with Other Diseases 87

become a father. His wife, however, was not ready. While he now ate a strictly
vegetarian diet and followed a highly regulated lifestyle, she did not. She
seemed intolerant of a daily routine that allowed for no recreational drugs, no
drinking, and no “fun.” Therefore, one memorable weekend, she left him
during his absence, taking every household effect with her—all of their jointly
held assets.

Unable to cope with this psychological and financial trauma, Rob fell back
into his old ways. During the summer of 1995, Rob went through a dramatic
weight loss dropping 45 pounds, from 185 to 140. He literally lay on the floor of
his now empty apartment, unable to move because of his total weakness.

In a moment of lucidity, this thirty-two-year-old addict realized that he was
dying from self-inflicted wretchedness. His signs and symptoms of disease
were variable and bizarre too. Rob had been suffering from what was later
diagnosed as acute and chronic mercurialism (mercury poisoning), for his
fingers swelled at night to twice their normal size and turned blue; he vomited
repeatedly, and simultaneously, he had severe abdominal pains. Added to
these discomforts were bloody diarrhea, inability to produce urine, mouth
ulcerations, loose teeth, loss of appetite, and ringing in his ears. It turns out that
the addict's mercurialism came from the dental amalgam fillings (comprising
50 percent mercury) that occupied cavities in twelve of his teeth. The
amalgams’ mercury content was leaching into his body and brain.

It was then that Rob finally gathered himself together and managed to
muster enough energy to make his way to his mother’s home in the San Diego
area. That's when she recognized that her son was on the verge of death,
confirmed by a physician at the University of California. And she put him on
the Gerson Therapy at once. In just six weeks, Rob regained 20 pounds of
muscle without exercising, freed himself of cravings, went through no
agonizing symptoms of drug and alcohol withdrawal, and developed excellent
muscle tone by strictly resuming his vegetarian diet. The young man’s signs
and symptoms of mercury poisoning disappeared along with his obvious
addictions.

Of course, added to his Gerson Therapy, Rob sought out the services of a
dentist who practices mercury-free, holistically, and biologically. The dentist
removed Rob’s amalgams, substituting dental composite filling materials. Rob
is now functioning normally and has become a keen exponent of the Gerson
Therapy. At 6 feet, 2 inches, he is back to his normal weight of 185 pounds and
at the last report on March 30, 1999, is active and successful in his profession.

RECOVERY AFTER STROKE AND HEART ATTACK
At age eighty-seven, in December 1993, Rob’s grandfather (on his mother’s
side) suffered a heart attack (myocardial infarction) at home. His grandfather’s
wife quickly called for an ambulance, but while he was waiting to be treated in
the hospital emergency room he had a stroke that paralyzed him along the
entire right side of his body. He could not move and lost the power to speak
88 THE GERSON THERAPY

(aphasia) or to chew.

Myocardial infarction (MI) is death of a segment of heart muscle, which
follows interruption of its blood supply and is usually confined to the heart's
left ventricle. The patient experiences a “heart attack,” sudden severe chest
pain, which may spread to the arms and throat. The main danger is that of
ventricular fibrillation (overly fast beating of the heart), which accounts for
most of the MI fatalities. Associated complications are heart failure, heart
rupture, pulmonary embolism, phlebothrombosis, pericarditis, shock, mitral
incompetence, and perforation of the septum between the ventricles.

Stroke, formerly known as apoplexy, is a sudden attack of weakness af-
fecting one side of the body, the consequence of an interruption of the flow of
blood to the brain. The primary disease is in the heart or blood vessels; the
effect on the brain is secondary. The stroke varies in severity from a passing
weakness or tingling in a limb to a profound paralysis, coma, and death.

Rob’s grandfather was hospitalized for the treatment of myocardial in-
farction and stroke near his Sacramento, California, home. During his
confinement in intensive care for three weeks, he was administered lots of
drugs. He was helpless to do anything for himself and, upon his discharge
from the hospital, his wife was advised by the cardiovascular experts to put the
sick old man into a nursing home. But Rob’s mother wouldn't let that happen
to her father whom she loved so much.

Although she was shocked by her dad’s appearance as he slumped in his
wheelchair, paralyzed, incontinent, speechless, head drooping to one side, and
drooling, Rob’s mother worked with him day and night. After learning of the
Gerson Therapy, she put her father on the program, feeding him fresh
vegetables and only a few juices at first, while he still took the prescribed
drugs. Slowly but steadily she increased the intensity of her father’s dietary
treatment. With love, she prepared his vegetables, fresh raw organic juices, and
Hippocrates soup and served them according to Dr. Gerson’s
recommendations. Slowly she decreased the many drugs he was taking.

In less than three weeks, her father was up and out of the wheelchair and
walking around the yard. In three months, he was walking in a park across the
street from his home. In August 1994, at age eighty-eight (eight months after
the heart attack and its associated stroke), he walked into the Woodland office
of the California Department of Motor Vehicles and applied for (and received)
a driver's license. He lived to age ninety-three, when the complications of an
accidental fall sent him to a hospital, where he died.

GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE GERSON DIETARY
PROGRAM

Dr. Gerson was a great admirer of the teachings of the Swiss physician and
Success with Other Diseases 89

chemist Paracelsus (1493-1541), and he quoted the Paracelsus Arcanum, which
emphasized: Diet must he the basis of all medical therapy, yet diet should not be a
treatment in itself, Consequently, although the Gerson dietary program is the
foundation for a total healing effect, other adjuvant aspects of treatment are
incorporated too, such as coffee enemas, castor oil packs, ozone therapy, clay
poultices, hydrotherapy, hyperthermia tub baths, live cell therapy, rectal ozone
insufflation, dietary supplementation with specific nutrients, and other items.

In providing his nutritional eating program, Dr. Gerson was rather con-
siderate of modern social mores, taste temptations, family feasts, holidays,
personal living habits, cultural requirements, and the economic pressures that a
sick or even a well person would have to face. Consequently, he divided the
Gerson preventive dietary program into two portions: one-quarter of all the food
to be eaten could be to one’s choice; the three-quarters remaining must be taken
for the purpose of protecting the functions of the highly essential organs — the
liver, the kidneys, the brain, the heart, and so on.

Dr. Gerson did suggest that, in order to prevent disease, one should eat a
good diet three-quarters of which is vegetarian, nutritious, and cell- building
foods, while the other quarter could be “at choice.” The authors believe that Dr.
Gerson’s liberalism with food percentages should be tempered at present. More
than forty years later, because of modern usage of overly processed foods,
doctor-prescribed and over-the-counter pharmaceutical products, toxic
pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and food-processing chemicals, plus
additions of much greater amounts of carcinogenic, atherogenic, allergenic,
mitogenic, and other synthetics, it is our opinion that Dr. Gerson’s original food
suggestions are too liberal.

Because he never anticipated how much industry and commerce would
come to poison the people and reduce the food value of what's eaten, Dr.
Gerson’s humanitarian food proportions are no longer valid. We urge instead
that a person newly recovered from illness, as well as any normal and healthy
individual who wishes to remain that way, would be wiser to use 90 percent
“defensive,” highly nutritious foods, and possibly allow a mere 10 percent of
their meals “at choice.”

The fundamentals of Dr. Gerson’s general dietary outline offered to patients,
he said, were “written to prevent sickness, not to cure it” To achieve a
complete cure, he added, a great deal more effort was required As we've
stated, Dr. Gerson included such procedures as medicine like nutritional
supplementation and liver detoxification, two mandatory programs that we
will discuss at length in later chapters. His claim was, “It’s safer to use foods in
the most natural form, combined and mixed by nature and raised, if possible,
by an organic gardening process, thus obeying the laws of nature.”2

This chapter offers Dr. Gerson’s philosophy of eating correctly. It lays down
the general guideposts for spotting what's good and bad about the foods to be
selected. However, the actual foods to be eaten at each meal on the Gerson
menu plan don’t make their appearance until the next chapter.
90 THE GERSON THERAPY

THE SCIENCE BEHIND DR. GERSON’S ANTI-

DEGENERATIVE-DISEASE DIET

The anti-degenerative-disease diet developed during the 1930s by Max
Gerson, M.D., was first officially recorded as a proven treatment program at the
University of Munich. It was afforded extraordinary laboratory support
through funding from both the Bavarian and the Prussian federal government."

Dr. Gerson focused then on the experimental use of foods of dietary purity
(unprocessed and totally natural). He added the adjunctive use of medications
to remove tissue edema occurring in a variety of pathologies such as
tuberculosis, arthritis, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Edema is
characterized by salt and water alterations in the tissues that were eventually
defined and named in 1977 as tissue damage syndrome’—decreased cell
potassium (K*), increased cell sodium (Na*), and increased cell water (cellular
swelling).4

Nutritional treatment to provide cells with a high K*, low Na* environment
improves edema and leads to enhanced tissue resistance and immunities,
which together bring about better healing outcomes for sick people such as
tubercular patients.5 This rationale of tissue damaged syndrome may be traced
through all of Dr. Gerson’s subsequent efforts in the management of
degenerative diseases, particularly for those patients beset by cancer.®

Dr. Gerson’s anti-degenerative-disease dietary program is individualized to
meet the needs of every patient, but it does have uniform components. As we
mentioned in chapters 1, 2, and 6, for most patients it is restricted in salt, fat,
and protein. It furnishes large quantities of multiple nutrients, enzymes,
phytochemicals, and other nourishing ingredients which act like nutraceuticals.
At the same time, each day’s thirteen hourly feedings of 8 ounces of raw
vegetable and fruit juices offer the diet’s participant an ultimate boosting of his
or her immune system Nothing else known to the mind of man could be
healthier or more stimulating of medical preventive homeostasis than the
Gerson Therapy.

Before the disruption of supplies that began in late 1985, raw veal liver was
additionally offered as part of the Gerson dietary program. That practice of
juicing and feeding calf’s liver had to be discontinued in 1987 because of
repeated instances of bacterial contamination by the pathological organism
Campylobacter fetus s. fetus. Comparisons of patients from different time frames
show that those sick people receiving uncontaminated calf’s liver juice had
experienced better survival outcomes overall.”

Served in three generous daily meals, Dr. Gerson’s diet includes food
consumption from 2,600 calories up to 3,200 calories per day. This is no small
amount of food; it requires the ingestion of approximately 17 to 20 pounds of
vegetables and fruits per day. The plant food comes from all of the required
raw, organic material needed for the thirteen 8-ounce glasses of juices besides
Success with Other Diseases 91

the solid foods of the three meals. Still, although massive in amount, there is
some caloric restriction because of the naturalness and purity of quality of the
foods.

The Gerson menu plan is patterned after the antitumor effect of calorie
restriction first demonstrated in Germany in 19098 and again in the United
States in 1914.° Although this natural way of eating—which we reemphasize as
being mostly vegetables and fruits—was tailored mainly to correct the
pathology of malignancies, it’s a form of orthomolecular medicine that works
toward improving the physical, mental, and emotional health states of any
person undergoing a worsening of well-being. It also restores body weight to
normal, causing weight loss in the obese as well as weight gain in underweight
patients.

Orthomolecular medicine, as defined by the now deceased two-time Nobel
laureate Linus Pauling, Ph.D., in his foreword for the book Putting It All
Together. The New Orthomolecular Nutrition, coauthored by Abram Hoffer, M_D.,
Ph.D., and Morton Walker, D.PM., is a relatively new term in medicine. It
means that a therapeutic approach is designed to provide an optimum
molecular environment for body functions. The orthomolecular method offers
particular reference to the best concentrations of substances normally present in
the human physiology, whether formed within the body (endogenously) or
ingested from outside the body (exogenously).

Orthomolecular medicine is the use of completely natural remedies
(vitamins, minerals, herbs, enzymes, nutraceuticals, etc.) without any ap-
plication of synthetic or other pharmaceutical agents. Orthomolecular
medicine, in fact, is the healthiest way to achieve a therapeutic effect for healing
diseases of all types. It is totally different from the toximolecular medicine of
currently popular allopathic drug treatment taught in most medical schools.’

WHAT'S DIFFERENT ABOUT THE GERSON DIET

Sometimes people wonder whether the Gerson diet is different from or
similar to other nutritional treatment approaches. In some regards, it may be
similar, but the Gerson diet is not the same as any other treatment. The
macrobiotic approach, for example, recommends cooked foods almost
exclusively and is high in sodium-—just the opposite to Dr. Gerson’s
therapeutic basis of diet. Another dietary approach recommends large
quantities of nuts and seeds. Still another stresses the importance of pH balance
in foods. The Ann Wigmore diet prefers raw foods to the exclusion of any other
edible form and recommends eating many nuts and sprouts.

These many diets have their supporters, and all have successfully treated
some patients. There are numerous schools of thought about how diet affects
health and the several different paths to wholeness. We acknowledge that the
approach you take to your own healing must be your own decision, but we encourage
92 THE GERSON THERAPY

you to choose one approach and stick with it, adding aspects from other
techniques of treatment only when they are known to be compatible. The
Gerson Therapy usually is not effective if its dietary guidelines are mixed with
those from other treatments. While the Gerson diet is similar to, and has served
as the foundation for many other nutritional healing programs, its guidelines
activate specific biochemical processes that promote healing in a unique way.

The foods and juices consumed on the Gerson diet constitute its primary
prescription for healing, comparable to a drug in allopathic treatment. Significant
deviation from the diet can be as serious for a Gerson patient as missing an
insulin shot can be for a diabetic, or as missing a chemotherapy or radiation
appointment can be for a cancer patient undergoing an allopathic treatment.

All you need to know for optimum results from the Gerson Therapy is in
this book. We have observed) that the best results are achieved by following
these guidelines to the letter. Of course, we recognize that sometimes it will be
impossible to meet all of the guidelines, whether for logistical, financial, or
other reasons, and many of those who must “cut corners” will still achieve fair
to good healing with the Gerson method. Rare, mild deviation from the therapy
does not seem to affect outcomes significantly.

You will not fail to heal simply because you miss one glass of juice a
couple of times a month. You will not fail if you must make use of commercial
produce occasionally instead of organic. If organic produce is unavailable,
commercial vegetables may be juiced after you have washed them thoroughly
to remove the coatings of pesticides, herbicides, and other standard poisons
used by agribusiness. Nevertheless, commercial produce is still deficient in
nutrients. You will reduce your chances of success if you cut too many corners.
How many? There is no good answer to that question, because every patient,
every diagnosis, responds differently to the Gerson Therapy.

On the other hand, many patients have followed the guidelines in Dr. Max
Gerson’s original book A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases without medical
assistance and have healed themselves. Still, the Gerson Therapy must not be
considered a “paint by numbers” approach to healing. Some ingenuity on the
part of the person endeavoring to heal is sometimes required.

ADJUNCTS TO THE DIETARY PROGRAM DEVELOPED IN MUNICH

The patient's metabolism is accelerated by the addition of iodine to his
intake. Dr. Gerson discovered that natural thyroid hormone derived from
animal sources plus the use of Lugol's iodine solution along with mild exercise,
all used together, improved the healing person’s metabolism markedly.12
Niacin, potassium salts (acetate, gluconate, and monophosphate), and crude
liver extract with injectable vitamin B)2 were given to support accelerated
cellular energy production. These vitamin and mineral nutrients are still being
Success with Other Diseases 93

utilized as supplements to the Gerson dietary program even today.

In his University of Munich experiments of the 1930s, Dr. Gerson found that
temporary protein restriction aided edema absorption and favored
improvement in his patients’ overall health.15 In his anti-degenerative- disease
diet, especially as it involved cancer, a desirable protein repletion with nonfat,
enzyme-predigested dairy products often occurs after at least six weeks.
Therefore, enzyme-modified defatted milk such as yogurt or unsalted nonfat
cottage cheese is allowed as part of the dietary therapy. Shorter periods of
protein restriction are recommended for children and elderly patients.

The Munich investigations turned up the therapeutic usefulness of a variety
of additional procedures which are currently employed for Gerson Therapy
participants. For instance, here are some adjuncts to the Gerson degenerative
disease diet which will be discussed at length in later chapters:

* Castor oil, a cathartic with no known adverse clinical side effects, should
be administered to someone sick with acute or chronic damage,
especially cancer patients, every other day for many weeks (see chapter
11).

¢ Enemas of boiled coffee are taken by the patient as needed, as frequently
as every four hours throughout the day, for their ability to alleviate pain,
detoxify, and improve nutritional condition (see chapter 12). Occasional
nighttime enemas are suggested in special cases.

Coffee enemas work exceedingly well to overcome the inflammatory aches
and pains of arthritis, cancer, and other painful body degenerations. In 1994,
Dr. Peter Lechner observed statistically significant cancer pain relief from
coffee enemas in a prospective matched control trial that he conducted at the
Municipal Hospital of Graz, Austria.14 Pain relief for all types of malignancies
is theorized to occur from a dialysis across the gut wall through coffee enemas,
for tumor tissue breakdown products such as the polyamines, toxic bound
nitrogen, and ammonia.

Also observed is that those cancer patients taking coffee enemas, large
amounts of Vitamin C and other aspects of the Gerson Therapy are able to
better tolerate aggressive treatments with cytotoxic agents currently recom-
mended by many conventionally practicing and unenlightened oncologists.1°

References for Chapter Seven

1. Gerson, M. A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases and The Cure of
Advanced Cancer by Diet Therapy, 6th edition. Bonita, Calif: The Gerson
Institute, 1999, 22.

2. Ward, PS. History of the Gerson Therapy Washington, D.C.: Office of
Technology Assessment, 1988.

3. Cope, F.W. “Pathology of structured water and associated cations in cells
(the tissue damage syndrome) and its medical treatment.” Physiological
94 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chemistry and Physics. 9(6):547—553, 1977.

4. Evans, WE.D. The Chenustry of Death Springfield, 111.: Charles C.
Thomas, 1963, pp. 23-25.

5. Gerson, M. Diet Therapy for Lung Tuberculosis. Leipzig, Germany: Franz
Deuticke, 1934.

6. Op. cit., Gerson, M., pp. 164, 166, 184, 197.

7. Op. cit., Evans, WE.D., p. 31.

8. Moreschi, C. “The connection between nutrition and tumor promotion.”
Z. Immunitatsforsch. 2:651, 1909.

9. Rous, P “The influence of diet on transplanted and spontaneous mouse
tumors.” Journal of Experimental Medicine. 20:433, 1914.

10. Hoffer, A; Walker, M. Putting It All Together. The New Orthomolecular
Nutnition. New Canaan, Conn.: Keats Publishing, 1978 and 1997, pp. Iv, v.

11.Silverstone, H.; Tannenbaum, A. “Influence of thyroid hormone on the
formation of induced skin tumors in mice.” Cancer Research, 9:684-688, 1949.

12. Wesch, M.A; Conen, L. A.; Wesch, C.W. “Inhibition of growth of human
breast carcinoma xenografts by energy expenditure via voluntary exercise in
athymic mice fed a high-fat diet.” Nutrition in Cancer. 23:309-317, 1995.

13. Gerson, M. “Fluid rich potassium diet as treatment for cardiorenal in-
sufficiency.” Munich med. Wochenschr, 82:571-574, 1935.

14. Lechner, P; Hildenbrand, G. ‘A reply to Saul Green's critique of the ra-
tionale for cancer treatment with coffee enemas and diet: cafestol derived from
beverage coffee increases bile production in rats; and coffee enemas and diet
ameliorate human cancer pain in stages I and IL” Townsend Letter for Doctors
and Patients. 130:526-529, 1994.

15. Gerson, M. “The cure of advanced cancer by diet therapy: a summary of
30 years of clinical experimentation’ (posthumous publication). Plrysiology of
Chemistry and Physics. 10(4):449-464, 1978.

16. Lechner, P; Kronberger, I. “Erfahrungen mit dem Einsatz der Diat-
Therapie in der Chirurgischen Onkologie.” Aktuel Ernilrungsmedizin. 2(15)
:72—78, 1990.
Chapter Eight

FOODS ON THE GERSON
DIET PLAN

fter co-founding the Gerson Institute of Bonita, California, Charlotte

Gerson has carried forward the specifics of what to eat and not to eat as
part of the illness-fighting menu plan. Her father set down over half a century
ago how to permanently overcome chronic degenerative diseases by use of
dietary procedures. According to those original instructions, described in 1958
by Dr. Gerson in his book A Cancer Therapy, a sick person using the Gerson
Therapy should include those eating guidelines now presented below.

Foopbs THAT MAY BE CONSUMED IN QUANTITY

¢ All kinds of fruits are acceptable, mostly fresh and some prepared in
different ways; freshly prepared vegetable juices; fruit salads; cold fruit
soups; mashed bananas, raw grated apples, applesauce, and some other
fruits.
¢ The recommended fruits are apples, grapes, cherries, mangoes, peaches,
oranges, apricots, grapefruit, bananas, tangerines, pears, plums, melons,
papayas, persimmons, and so on, none of which should come from cans
or frozen packages. Pears and plums are
more easily digestible when stewed. All fruit may also be stewed. Dried
fruit may be eaten if unsulfured, such as apricots, peaches, raisins, prunes,
or mixed fruit, all of which should be washed, soaked, and stewed. All
berries, nuts, pineapple, avocados, and cucumbers are forbidden.
¢ All vegetables freshly prepared, some stewed in their own juices and others
either raw or finely grated, such as organically grown carrots, cauliflower or
celery; vegetable salads, soups, and so on. No frozen vegetables are allowed.
* Potatoes are best when baked; the contents may be mashed with yogurt or
THE GERSON THERAPY

soup; they should never be fried but may be boiled in their jackets.

Salads of green leaves may be mixed with tomatoes, fruits, vegetables, and
other organically grown plant edibles.

Unsalted bread may contain whole rye but only a small percentage of whole
wheat flour. The grain should be organically grown.

Buckwheat cakes and potato pancakes are optional, as are brown sugar
(organic dried cane juice, ie., Sucanat), honey, maple sugar, and 100 percent
pure maple syrup. (Use no fats or baking soda when baking.)

Oatmeal should be used freely.

Milk products such as churned buttermilk, nonfat unflavored yogurt, and
nonfat unsalted pot (cottage) cheese are allowed. After two years on a strict
Gerson Therapy program, cream and ice cream can be used sparingly or
restricted to holidays. (Dr. Gerson flat-out states: “Ice cream is ‘poison’ for
children.”)

After the ill individual has recovered, allowing two years or more in some
cases, the remaining 10 percent of the dietary regime (remembering from
chapter 7 that Dr. Gerson’s original food proportions have been modified to
conform to the more unnatural methods used in growing and processing
foods during modern times), which allows for personal choice, may consist
of meat, fish, eggs, nuts, candies, cakes, or whatever one likes best.

Nicotine should be avoided under any circumstances.

Liquors, wine, and beer should be reduced to a minimum in favor of fresh
fruit juices.

Coffee and tea should be cut to a minimum with the exception of the
following teas: peppermint, chamomile, linden flower, orange flower, and a
few others.

Salt, bicarbonate of soda, smoked fish, and sausage must be avoided
Foods on the Gerson Diet Plan 99

completely (see chapter 10 for a more complete explanation about salt).

¢ Sharp condiments such as pepper and ginger must be eliminated. But
fresh garden herbs are recommended for regular consumption, including
onions, garlic, parsley leaves, chives, horseradish, and celery.

¢ All vegetables may be consumed, stewed in their own juices to avoid the
loss of minerals easily dissolved in water during cooking. Especially
recommended for their mineral content are carrots, peas, tomatoes,
broccoli, Swiss chard, spinach, string beans, brussels sprouts, artichokes,
beets cooked with apples, cauliflower with tomatoes, red cabbage with
apples, and raisins. Everything must be prepared without salt.

¢ Any cooking equipment made of aluminum is absolutely forbidden, as
are microwave ovens, pressure cookers, and steam cookers.

* While following the Gerson eating plan for the first year and a half, don’t
eat any eggs, fish, meat, butter, cheese, and milk.

Altogether, because of the extensive juicing of vegetables, a follower of the
Gerson eating plan takes in between 17 and 20 pounds of plant foods each day.
You'll understand how and why this is done after reading our explanation of
the juicing concept in chapter 9.

FOODS PROHIBITED ON THE

GERSON MENU PLAN

All foods eaten as part of the Gerson diet must be prepared without the use
of the following categories of prohibited foods:1

Salt and Sodium

Salt and sodium in all forms, including table salt, sea salt, celery salt,
vegetable salt, Bragg Liquid Aminos™, tamari, soy sauce, “lite salt,’ baking
soda, sodium-based baking powders, and anything with “sodium” in its name,
as well as salt substitutes, are forbidden. Skin contact with Epsom salts should
be avoided. Combinations of herbs, often sold under names such as “instead of
salt’ or “salt-free seasoning,” may be used in small quantities, if they contain
permitted herbs without added salt or salt substitutes.
100 THE GERSON THERAPY

Oils and Fats

Oils and fats, plus any foods that contain them, are prohibited. This
prohibition includes corn oils, olive oils, canola oils, and all other vegetable oils
except flaxseed oil as specifically prescribed; also forbidden are butter, cheese,
cream, and other dairy fats; all animal fats; all margarines or oil-based spreads;
coconuts and avocados; all hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated oils; Olean,
Olestra, and other “fat substitutes’; nut butters; and any other source of dietary
fats, except as naturally occurring in allowed foods.

Proteins and High-Protein Foods

Proteins and high-protein foods are not allowed. These disallowed foods
include all meats, seafoods, and other animal proteins; nuts and seeds; soy or
other legume-based food products; all protein powders or supplements,
including barley- or algae-based powders, unless specifically used when
prescribed for protein supplementation.

In addition to the above three categories, there are certain other foods that
must be “off-limits” until the ill individual is completely healed, and in some
cases, even after full recovery. The “off-limits” foods include almost all
packaged, prepared (“convenience”) foods such as those frozen, canned,
bottled, or boxed. They must be forsaken for health reasons. Restaurant food
will almost always be unacceptable, because it is rarely organic and almost
always is cooked with added salt, fats, or other additives inappropriate to the
Gerson eating plan.

Because the Gerson approach to healing looks at everything that goes into,
or on, the body as factors in the therapeutic process, the Gerson Therapy may
appear more restrictive than other “natural” or “holistic’ approaches. By means
of such attention to detail, the Gerson Therapy accomplishes healing even in some
extremely advanced cases of pathology, or in diseases that otherwise are considered
incurable.

Sometimes it’s tempting to deny the seriousness of one’s own condition. A
few sick people go through a thinking process that says, “Well, my malignancy
isn’t very advanced; it’s only stage II cancer and not the worst kind, so I don’t
need to follow the diet as closely as someone near death.” We believe this is a
foolish form of thinking. Similarly, some Gerson Therapy patients are the
recipients of well-meaning but uninformed advice from friends, relatives, and
even medical practitioners who know little about the complex biochemical
interactions occurring in a body combining the Gerson diet, medications, and
detoxification. We advise
that it’s unwise to arbitrarily modify the true Gerson dietary therapy for the
sake of personal convenience or to please somebody else’s ego. Ask any person
wanting to give you advice: “How many cancer patients have you healed with
this advice?”

We strongly recommend that you refrain from adding to or changing the proven
dietary guidelines without the advice of a certified Gerson Therapy practitioner.
Foods on the Gerson Diet Plan 101

(Contact the Gerson Institute to be directed to a certified Gerson Therapy
practitioner near your location.) Making even minor modifications of the
Gerson Therapy protocol is poor practice. Why? Because the treatment
procedure has shown itself repeatedly to successfully achieve remission or cure
of cancer and nearly every other chronic degenerative disease. Quite simply,
used exactly as presented, the Gerson dietary program has shown itself to
work!

THREE FOOD CATEGORIES: DESIRABLE, OCCASIONALLY
ALLOWED, AND PROHIBITED

Desirable Organically Grown Foods

Sick or well, as a means of reversing pathology or to prevent its occurring, the
food categories listed below are excellent sources of nourishment and may be
consumed without limitations. The truly desirable foods are:

¢ All fruits and vegetables plus potatoes, except as listed under prohibited
foods

¢ Fresh fruit and vegetable juices, as shown in chapter 9

¢ Raw fruit and vegetable salads (see below in this chapter)

* Special Hippocrates soup (see below for its preparation)

* Oatmeal

The desirable foods mentioned actually are necessary for their therapeutic
effects. They are easily and quickly digested. Eating large and frequent portions
of them is encouraged on the Gerson diet. One may even eat them during the
night when awaking hungry, to provide critical nutrition for rebuilding
damaged tissues and maintaining necessary nourishment. As the body restores
itself, many people become ravenous with hunger. There is virtually no limit to
the quantity of these good foods that can be consumed, provided that it is high-
quality, organically grown if possible, and fresh from the “desirable” list. We
recommend keeping food available at the bedside for nighttime snacking (such
as fruit, fruit salad, or applesauce).

Occasionally Allowed Organically Grown Foods

Unless otherwise prescribed by your Gerson-trained health professional, the
following groups of foods, free of salt, salt derivatives, and oils and fats, may
be eaten once per week:

* Breads made from whole rye, oat, or rice flour

* Organic popcorn (dry-popped, unsalted, and without fat)
¢ Brown or wild rice

* Yams and sweet potatoes
102

THE GERSON THERAPY

¢ Maple syrup, honey, raw brown sugar, and unsulfured blackstrap
molasses up to a daily combined maximum of all sweeteners of 2
teaspoonfuls.

Very Occasionally Allowed Foods

ingested not more than once or twice per month, the following food groups

are permitted occasionally:

* Organically grown, frozen vegetables (if prepared without added salt,
fat, or other prohibited ingredients)

¢ Sprouted beans or seeds (e.g., lentils, beans) other than alfalfa sprouts,
which are forbidden.

Prohibited Foods

Whenever possible, we offer a brief explanation as to why the various foods

cited under this prohibition category are not allowed on the Gerson dietary

program.

¢ All manufactured (processed) foods such as those that are bottled, canned,
frozen, preserved, refined, salted, smoked, or sulfured (except as
specifically mentioned as being allowed) are forbidden.

* Dairy products of all types such as milk and milk products (including
goat's milk) are forbidden. These prohibited items include cheese, cream,
ice cream, ice milk, butter, and buttermilk, except as

specifically allowed under proteins. Dairy products are generally extremely

high in fat. Cheeses may be 65 percent fat and high in sodium The

commercial buttermilks are “cultured” (produced from leftover milk,
flavored, and thickened) and contain fat and sodium When protein is
prescribed, however, fresh, churned buttermilk without any additives may
be taken after the sixth to twelfth week of healing. Unsalted, nonfat Quark is
permitted when available.

Alcohol should not be imbibed because it limits the blood’s ability to carry
oxygen and places strain on the liver to detoxify and remove it from the
body. Alcohol is toxic.

Pineapples and bernes may cause an allergic reaction to the aromatic acids

present.

Avocados are too high in fats.

Cucumbers in combination with the required juices to be taken daily are

difficult to digest.

Spices such as black pepper or paprika are irritants. Basil, oregano, and
Foods on the Gerson Diet Plan 103

others are to be avoided because of their high aromatic acid content.
Cayenne pepper, jalapenos, and so on are also irritants and can stop the
healing.

Soybeans and soy products including tofu, tempeh, miso, tamari, other soy
sauces, Bragg’s Liquid Aminos™, textured vegetable protein, soy milk, and
all other soy-based products are disallowed. For a variety of different
reasons including their high fat content, high sodium content, toxic
inhibition to nutrient absorption, and/or elevated protein content, use of
soy in all its forms must be avoided.

Dried beans and legumes should not be used.

Sprouted Alfalfa and Other Bean or Seed Sprouts are high in L- canavanine, an
immature amino acid that is responsible for immune system suppression.
Also, patients with no prior history of chronic joint pain have developed the
sudden onset of arthritic symptoms upon ingesting alfalfa sprouts. Healthy
monkeys have developed lupus erythematosus from alfalfa sprouts in their
diet.

Oils and fats of all kinds, with the exclusion of fresh, raw, organic flaxseed
oil, are forbidden.

Refined white and brown sugars are forbidden.

Wheat flour (including whole wheat) is forbidden; also all types of pasta.

Beef pork, poultry, eggs, fish, seafood, and all other meat or animal flesh products
are prohibited. These animal foods are high in pro-
THE GERSON THERAPY

tein, chemicals, preservatives, hormones, and salt and are difficult to digest,
often have too much fat, and make additional work for the body’s liver and
excretory systems.

Black tea, green tea, and other non herbal or caffeine-containing teas are forbidden
because of their undesirable aromatic acids and caffeine content. Dr. Gerson
cited aromatics as interfering with healing by producing allergic reactions
(see above as listed under pineapples and berries).

Candy, cakes, muffins, pastries, and other refined sweets are prohibited because
they contain health-threatening ingredients, such as fats, oils, refined sugars
or flours, salt, soda, baking powder, or dairy products. Note, however, that
some breads and pastries may be baked using permitted ingredients which
will make the diet more interesting but must not be consumed on a regular
basis.

The drinking of water is not encouraged. Dr. Gerson believed that a Gerson
Therapy patient should not drink water, because it dilutes the stomach acid
and doesn’t allow maximum gastrointestinal tract capacity for nutrition
from fresh foods and juices. The juices provide adequate fluids.

Mushrooms are not vegetables but fungi and contain complex proteins and
are difficult to digest and offer little nutrition.

Coffee and coffee substitutes by mouth, both with caffeine and decaffeinated,
cause undesirable stimulation of the digestive system. Orally taken caffeine
overly excites the central nervous system, while the essential oils disturb
digestion. In contrast, when coffee is taken rectally, it offers an entirely
advantageous effect on the liver where, aside from detoxification, it
increases the production of glutathione S-transferase (a desirable enzyme).
Nuts and seeds, including almonds, apricot kernels, sunflower seeds,
flaxseeds, peanuts, cashews, and all other nuts and seeds, are prohibited
because they are too high in protein and fat. In “roasting” salt is added, the
fat is altered, and nuts and seeds become more harmful.

Hot peppers (jalapenos, etc.) contain the same strong aromatics found in
prohibited spices. Peppers tend to inhibit healing responses and should be
avoided. Green, yellow, and sweet red peppers may be used without
limitation.

Mustard and carrot greens.

Baking powder and baking soda contain sodium and alum (alu-
Foods on the Gerson Diet Plan 105

minum), which are highly toxic. Aluminum-free and sodium-free baking
powders such as Featherweight™ (potassium-based powder) may be
used occasionally.

¢ Fluoride components that are part of any item at all such as water,
toothpaste, mouth gargle, hair dyes, beauty parlor permanents, cos-
metics, underarm deodorants, lipstick, and lotions must be avoided
under any conditions.

How to Prepare Foods on the Gerson Eating

Program

Since foods of the Gerson eating program are easily digested, people
following it generally require larger and more frequent servings. Eat as much of
these foods as possible, even during the night if desired. The foods to be
consumed include fresh and stewed fruit, juices of fresh fruits and vegetables,
fresh raw and cooked vegetables and leaves, salads, special Hippocrates soup,
potatoes, oatmeal, salt-free rye bread (limited to one or two slices a day), and
herb tea.

Vegetable Preparation

We admit that by most standards of modern food preparation, Gerson
Therapy meals are considered overcooked. Dr. Gerson believed that foods
should be well done to make them tender, easy to chew, and digestible, which
would help the weakened digestive system acquire the greatest amount of soft
bulk plus nutrition in the most accessible form from the food consumed. The
soft cooked victuals therefore provide a buffer for the considerable volume of
juices and raw foods ingested. The modern “al dente” vegetable preparation is
supposed to keep enzymes intact. That is not correct; all enzymes are dead at
140 degrees Fahrenheit. Very ample enzymes are provided on the Gerson
Therapy through the raw juices, salads, and fruit.

All food must be prepared fresh; canned, bottled, boxed, or frozen foods
always contain additives and inhibit restoration of the body. Absolutely no salt,
soy sauces, or other sodium sources should be added to any consumed foods.
All prepared foods containing salt, such as most breads, should be eliminated
altogether.

It's not unnatural to tire of eating foods with the same soft consistency for
every meal. In the early stages of treatment, people are encouraged to eat large
quantities of foods and to cook them thoroughly. Raw fruit and salads with
celery, green onions, and radishes provide crisp and chewy foods for variation
from soft-cooked vegetables. Dr. Gerson did not want his patients to deviate
from the cooking methods used, but as a patient progresses in health, it may be
possible to include some foods cooked al dente for variation. Since exponents of
the Gerson Therapy consider food to be medication, any changes in one’s diet
or cooking technique should be discussed with a trained Gerson Therapy health
106 THE GERSON THERAPY

professional.

Cooked Foods

All vegetables, except those listed as prohibited, are recommended.
Vegetables should be cooked with a minimum of water or soup stock (perhaps
2 or 3 tablespoonfuls) slowly on low heat, just at boiling, until well done.
Usually such a procedure will take fifty to sixty minutes on the stovetop. To
prevent burning, place a metal mat or ring between the burner and pot to help
distribute the heat evenly. Vegetables can also be baked in covered glass dishes
in an oven, where the heat is more even and burning is less likely. A tight-
fitting lid should always be used to help retain moisture in foods, but no
pressure cooking.

Onions, tomatoes, and squash contain a lot of water, generally don’t need
any added liquid for cooking, and can add flavor to the cooked foods. Celery is
also good for flavoring.

Beets and potatoes can be boiled whole (without peeling) in water and
peeled when done, or may be baked.

Potatoes can also be scalloped, mashed, made into potato salad, or prepared
in a variety of other ways.

Spinach releases much water and oxalic acid in cooking. For this reason, the
water left after cooking spinach is bitter and should be discarded.

Corn can be boiled in water or eaten raw.

Herbs and Spices

Inasmuch as the aromatics of herbs and spices, as with pineapples and
berries, tend to interfere with the healing response, Dr. Gerson limited use of
such aromatics to small quantities of the relatively mild ones such as allspice,
anise, bay leaf, coriander, dill, fennel, mace, marjoram, rosemary, sage, saffron,
tarragon, thyme, sorrel, and summer savory. Chives, onions, garlic, and parsley
can be used in larger quantities.

Salads

Itis essential that the patient eat as many salads of raw vegetables as possible.
The following salad ingredients can be finely grated, chopped, or minced and
mixed together or eaten separately:

* Apples

* Carrots

* Watercress

* Green onions

* Knob or branch celery
Foods on the Gerson Diet Plan 107

* Lettuce greens
* Cauliflower

* Endive

* Chives

* Chicory

* Radishes

* Green peppers
* Tomatoes

Salad Dressing

NEVER use bottled dressing. Dilute organic red wine or apple cider vinegar
with water to taste for use as a salad dressing and add a little spray-dried
organic cane juice (Sucanat), some herbs, onion, or garlic for taste variety.
Lemon juice may be used in the place of vinegar. The prescribed flaxseed oil
can be used as part of the salad dressing.

Hippocrates Special Soup

Created as a staple food item for nearly all of his degenerative disease
patients, Dr. Gerson considered the Hippocrates special soup (invented by
Hippocrates) extremely important to eat at both lunch and dinner. While
much of the Gerson Therapy is directed toward cleansing the liver, the
Hippocrates soup helps to cleanse the kidneys. Particularly after patients
become used to eating without salt (usually within one to two weeks after
starting the treatment), the special soup is a tasty start to every meal.

To make the Hippocrates special soup, the following vegetables should be
thoroughly washed, not peeled, cut into cubes, covered with water, and
cooked for two hours. Put everything through a food mill; allow only fibers
and peels to remain. The result is a thick, creamy soup. Allow the soup to cool
before storing in a refrigerator. Make only enough for about two days so that
the excess, which loses its nutritional value after that time, will not be
consumed. Here are the quantities of vegetables:

* 1medium celery knob (root). If celery root is not in season, substitute 3
or 4 stalks of branch celery.

¢ Asmall amount of parsley

* 11/2 pounds of tomatoes (more if desired during the summer season)

¢ 2medium onions

* 1medium parsley root (rarely available; omit if not)

¢ 2 small leeks (if not available, substitute 2 additional medium onions)

* several cloves of garlic

* 1 pound of potatoes

Until the healing person is used to salt-free eating, raw pressed garlic may
be added for giving a “kick” to this Hippocrates special soup and also to
108 THE GERSON THERAPY

vegetables, salads, etc. Garlic is healthful and may be used any time in any
amount.

Potatoes

High in plant proteins, potatoes are nutritional boons for any healing
person. We recommend eating them for both lunch and dinner; replace them
only rarely with organic brown or wild rice. Potatoes are of most nutritional
value when baked. They can also be served boiled in their jackets, mashed with
a little soup, peeled (after boiling), or cut up and mixed with salad dressing to
make a potato salad. They can be baked in a casserole with onion, tomatoes,
celery, and so on. If nonfat yogurt is prescribed after six to ten weeks on the
Gerson diet, add onions, chives, or garlic to the yogurt for a tasty dressing for
your baked potato, salad, or vegetable. Sweet potatoes may be served once a
week.

Oatmeal

A large portion of oatmeal, cooked slowly from V2 cup organic rolled oats
and 1 (or a little more) cup of purified water, should be eaten every day for
breakfast. Other cereals should not be used. Not only do oats supply good B
complex vitamins as well as proteins; most importantly, they

provide a soft cushion in the intestinal tract for the raw juices that follow.
Harsh and grainy cereals cannot provide this. For variety, add raw grated
apple, papaya, or other fruit; honey, 100 percent pure maple syrup, or un-
sulfured blackstrap molasses; raisins or other dried fruit, stewed prunes, or
other stewed dried or fresh fruit.

Bread and Other Starches

You may use some salt-free and fat-free rye bread only after consuming the full
required meal, Bread should not be the main part of any meal. When bread is
dry, it can be grated and used in recipes requiring bread crumbs. Occasionally
you may also use potato flour, tapioca, or cornstarch.

Sugars and Sweeteners

Use only organic brown sugar, maple syrup, organic light honey, or un-
sulfured molasses, and only up to 2 teaspoons a day of all combined
sweeteners, and only when hypoglycemia and/or diabetes are not present.

Herbal Teas

Peppermint and some other herb teas are allowed and encouraged for various
specific beneficial properties. Peppermint tea helps digestion; chamomile tea
Foods on the Gerson Diet Plan 109

is soothing; valerian tea can help sleep. Tahebo, also known as pau d’arco, is a
valuable anti-cancer tea and can be taken in any quantity at night.

Sample Menus

For breakfast, you should consume:

* 8 ounces of orange juice

¢ Large portion of oatmeal with choice of fruit sauce

* Organic 100 percent rye bread, unsalted and fat-free, toasted and spread
with honey

Lunch should consist of:

* Salad of many mixed raw ingredients

* 8 ounces or more of warm Hippocrates special soup
* 8 ounces of apple-carrot juice in combination

* Baked potato (with yogurt dressing when permitted)
¢ Freshly cooked vegetables

* Raw or stewed fruit

For dinner, the menu is the same as for lunch.

We suggest that you vary meals by using different vegetables, a variety of
methods of preparing potatoes, different kinds of salads, etc. Organic brown
rice may be served once a week. Organic sweet potatoes may be served once a
week.

See the Appendixes for the Patient Hourly Schedule.

Reference for Chapter Eight

1. Gerson Therapy Practitioner's Training Sermnar Workbook. Bonita, Calif: The
Gerson Institute, 1996, pp. 120, 121.
110 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chapter Nine

THIRTEEN GLASSES

L n 1981, when he was thirty-eight years old, acute infectious hepatitis
struck Paul Schofield of Orlando, Florida. It took the form of fever,
jaundice, and severe nausea. Mr. Schofield became so sick that he had to
abandon his leatherworking craft and the rented shop where he sold saddles,
belts, hats, and luggage of his own making. Day after day he felt weak to the
point of collapse.

Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver caused by viruses or bacteria and
brought on by exposure to toxic substances, contaminated blood products, or
immunological abnormalities. Acute infectious hepatitis may also be
transmitted by food or drink contaminated by a carrier or patient, and it
commonly occurs where sanitation is poor. After an incubation period ranging
from two weeks to forty days, the patient develops abnormally elevated liver
enzymes, fever, and sickness.

THE PATHOLOGY OF VIRAL HEPATITIS.

A fairly common systemic disease, viral hepatitis is marked by liver (he-
patic) cell destruction, necrosis, and autolysis, leading to anorexia, jaundice,
and hepatomegaly (abnormal liver enlargement). More than 70,000 cases of the
illness are reported annually in the United States. Today five specific types of
viral hepatitis are recognized (but were unknown in 1981). The five forms of
hepatitis are:

* Type A (infectious or short-incubation hepatitis). The incidence of
hepatitis A is rising among homosexuals and for those persons with an
Thirteen Glasses 111

immunosuppression related to an infection with the human im-
mumnodeficiency virus (HIV). The ingestion of seafood from polluted
waters can cause it too.

* Type B (serum or long-incubation hepatitis). Also increasing among HIV-
positive individuals, hepatitis B accounts for up to 10 percent of
postransfusion viral hepatitis cases in the United States. It is also
transmitted by human secretions and by feces, during intimate sexual
contact, and from the transfer of viruses into food prepared by infected
restaurant workers.

* Type C (undetermined as to specific organism type). I’his disease
organism is mostly acquired by blood transfusion from asymptomatic
donors. Of all the hepatitis viral diseases, type C hepatitis is on the
fastest rise among modern-day Americans.

* Type D is found most frequently as a complication of acute or chronic
hepatitis B, because this type D virus requires that sister organism's
double-shelled surface antigen to replicate.

¢ Type E (formerly grouped with type C under the name type non-A, non-B
hepatitis) primarily occurs among people recently returned from an
endemic area such as India, Africa, Asia, or Central America.

Of the five viral hepatitis diseases, hepatitis B and hepatitis C are the most
dangerous because they have a high risk of developing into liver cancer, and
one of these types most likely had infected Mr. Schofield.

At the time of his infection, Mr. Schofield’s skin showed a marked yellow
discoloration, which persisted for three weeks; his medical doctor could offer
no curative treatment because there was none known back then, in 1981,
especially by those physicians who had exclusively practiced their particular
allopathic-type (drug-dependent) medicine. There were no drugs to treat the
condition. The only medical suggestion given to this patient was to rest a lot,
take naps, and drink fluids like soda pop (which is toxic) or orange juice.
Although he did this for no less than eight months, Mr. Schofield failed to
improve in any way.

PAUL SCHOFIELD BEGINS JUICING ON THE GERSON THERAPY
A massage therapist from whom he received rubdowns recommended that
the sick man read the book A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases, which the
patient did. The book’s ideas seemed right and logical to him, so he set himself
up with a Norwalk® Juicer, Dr. Norman Walker's famous hydraulic pressing
device, and started the Gerson Therapy on his own. In proceeding with Dr.
112 THE GERSON THERAPY

Gerson’s instructions, Paul Schofield drank great quantities of juice, consisting
of an 8-ounce glass of carrot and apple or green juice, every waking hour of his
day —a minimum of thirteen glasses, and sometimes more.

“T immediately began to feel better. My liver enzyme test readings im-
proved. They moved down from a pathological high of 2,400 to the normal
range of 20. Within two months, when my physician reexamined me, his
verdict was that I no longer remained infectious; my blood counts were
normal,’ Paul Schofield said. “For several years, however, I occasionally
suffered from flulike symptoms. At such times, I would immediately go back
for a week to the full bevy ofjuicing required on the Gerson Therapy program.

“Sometimes drinking the juices for only a few days was sufficient for me to
get rid of the hepatitis symptoms. Even after just one day of drinking thirteen
glasses of juice my body, especially my liver, felt better. I learned that to
eliminate any of the infecting viruses, Hepatitis A, B, C,

D, and E, one must drink the fresh-made juices from organic vegetables and.
fruits,” says this man who thrived on a self-help Gerson juicing and food menu
plan.

Today, as indicated by his photograph, Paul Schofield is happy and thriving
in good health. His hepatitis symptoms don’t come on anymore; however, if
they do, the man knows that he can banish them quickly by drinking fresh-
made, organic vegetable and fruit juices.

SOME JUICING TIPS OFFERED PREVIOUSLY BY DR. GERSON

For the preparation of vegetable and fruit juices, Dr. Max Gerson rec-
ommended two machines: a separate triturator or grinder and a separate press.
One of his juicing tips was that all parts of the juice machine that come into
contact with ground foods should be made of stainless steel. Therapy
exponents currently favor one machine in particular which uses these two
processes.

As with Mr. Schofield, the juicing device most favored by Gerson Therapy
patients is the Norwalk® Juicer. It was invented about 1936 by Norman W.
Walker, D.Sc., and comes in two models, the 270-S Norwalk stainless finish and
the 270 Norwalk woodgrain finish. (See the Appendix for a listing of names,
locations, and other information advising as to where and how products and
supplies recommended for use by Gerson Therapy followers may be found.)

Dr. Gerson required his recovering patients always to prepare fresh juices
made from organic fruits and vegetables. He advised them never to attempt to
prepare sufficient juice for the whole day in the morning. Also, as another tip
discussed at length in his original text, Dr. Gerson advises not to drink water
Thirteen Glasses 113

because the full capacity of one’s stomach is needed for the juices and the
Hippocrates special vegetable soup (see chapter 8). Components in the soup are
readily absorbed through the gastrointestinal mucosa. Water filling up the
stomach tends to dilute the action of that organ’s gastric acids and digestive
enzymes.

This chapter gives a complete description of the types of juicing machines
along with the juicing process. As compared with Dr. Gerson’s original text,
here we provide much new information coming from those patients who have
prepared their own juices at home and restored themselves to good health. A
combination of the enzymatic effect of fresh, whole organic juices plus a
therapeutic saltless diet (see chapter 10) with appropriate, limited, nutritional
supplementation (see chapter 11) and the taking of coffee enemas (see chapters
12 and 13)—all assured means—results in renewed wellness that is long-
lasting, natural, and safe. Juicing plant produce and swallowing the result is the
most delicious way to good health.

RENEW WELLNESS BY DRINKING

ORGANIC, FRESH-MADE JUICES

Juicing and imbibing such juice are integral aspects of the Gerson Therapy
program. Unconditionally, the coauthors reaffirm: For arty ill individual as well
as for someone in a state of good health, drinking fresh- made juices processed from
organically grown fruits and vegetables frequently through each day is cnitical to
renewing or maintaining wellness.

An important note: While there are no federal standards for the commonly
used combination term organically grown, it usually refers to produce planted
and grown without chemical pesticides, herbicides, or synthetic fertilizers, on
farm lands and in groves, orchards, or vineyards that have been free of such
chemicals for from three to seven years.

Along with providing sufficient fluid intake, fresh juices furnish nearly all of
the nutrients — vitamins, minerals, enzymes, phytochemicals, herbals, and other
vital food substances, including even proteins —required for your body to heal
itself. Juice drinking is even more important for healing degenerative diseases
than eating the same nutrients held in whole food. In fact, juices are food, of
course, but in much more assimilable form for use by the gastrointestinal tract.
Juice drinking allows for better digestion and greater absorption. By a person's
conforming to the Gerson Therapy protocol and consuming thirteen 8-ounce
glasses— about 104 ounces of juice daily —this vast amount of liquid plus three
vegetarian meals offers the equivalent of between 17 and 20 pounds of food a
114 THE GERSON THERAPY

day. Few people (possibly nobody) could consume that much solid edible
material during usual waking hours. Drinking juices allows one to ingest
massive amounts of nourishment in a short time.

Degenerative diseases often promote poor digestion for those persons
victimized by them. Because of their intoxication from malfunctioning organs,
the presence of decreased gastric acids, digestive dysfunction overall, and other
such difficulties directly connective with the body's degenerations, such people
are likely to suffer from the loss of appetite and an inability to eat at all or to
hold and assimilate even small quantities of food. (Such a discomforting
condition is known as cachexia.) Yet degenerative disease patients who suffer in
this way often are able to keep themselves nourished rather well merely by
drinking fresh made juices. The juiced nutrients are far more vital to one’s body
than the fiber contents of whole foods. Nevertheless, solid foods must be added
to the patient's total intake.

JUICING HELPED DR. GERSON HEAL His PATIENTS

In order to bring about healing for his many tubercular, cardiovascular,
cancerous, diabetic, arthritic, and other patients suffering from degenerative
diseases, Max Gerson, M.D., sought out new methods for overcoming their
subclinical malnutrition. Even obese persons can lack nutrients. For each ill
individual, juicing at home is how Dr. Gerson met the challenge. And it was a
technique which proved valuable. The juices made from raw foods and drunk
by these very sick people provided the easiest and most effective means of
giving them the highest-quality nutrition. This unique method of feeding that
he developed during the approximately thirty-five year period from 1923 to
1958 produced the best clinical results ever witnessed in medical practice by
that midpoint in the twentieth century.

Today, with the twenty-first century upon us, the coauthors are reluctant to
make changes in a protocol that has been extremely effective for treating,
reversing, or sending into near-permanent remission degenerative diseases of
all types. These are the kinds of serious illnesses for which allopathic medicine
has had very little to offer. Still, staff of the Gerson Institute are not close-
minded. If some better method came along as a substitute for the high-dose
nutrition made available by juicing or the other techniques perfected by Dr.
Gerson, it would be adopted into the Gerson Therapy protocol.

During the course of his thirty years of active clinical practice, however, Dr.
Gerson did change his protocol considerably. He repeatedly altered what the
physician described as his “juice prescriptions” in response to his patients’
Thirteen Glasses 115

blood test results, healing reaction responses, allergies, weight variations, and
other metabolic conditions. The physiological responses of severely damaged
or weakened individuals often required him to change the medications and
juices on an almost daily basis, especially during their first weeks of following
the Gerson Therapy. That is the situation for current patients as well.2

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT DRINKING JUICES
Drinking juices begets large numbers of questions for which there are few
answers. For instance, we wonder at but cannot completely answer some of the
following queries from those utilizing the Gerson Therapy:

When or how regularly should one drink the juices? Dr. Gerson advised
that an ill individual should take 8 ounces at least once every hour, but it’s not
uncommon to find such a regimen difficult to accomplish.

What's to be done as a solution or compromise for being unable to follow
the program exactly? Drink as much as you can, but keep trying to ingest more.
In this situation for juicing and drinking, more is better.

How much juice should you drink? As mentioned, attempt to consume 104
ounces of fresh organic juice in twenty-four hours.

How soon after actually performing the juicing is the best time to drink
down the juice? Unquestionably, the answer is “At once!”

Is it acceptable to store the juice for future drinking? The direct and
uncompromising answer is “No!” But let's face it—if you work at a distance
from home and can’t lug around a 70-pound juicing machine, taking
apple/carrot juices along with you in thermos-type storage containers (glass or
stainless steel lined) or 8-ounce mason jars filled to the top is not all that bad.
Do it if it’s the only way you'll be getting your daily allotment of organic juices.
Never keep or take along green juices (made from salad greens) for future
ingestion because they oxidize quickly and lose their value.

Do we know what fruits and vegetables may best be combined or are
incompatible? Our observation is that almost all of plant produce is
compatible, although Dr. Gerson urged the use of specific combinations of
carrot and apple, carrot only, and juice made from various greens. Avoid other
juiced produce.
116 THE GERSON THERAPY

At which section of one’s gastrointestinal tract is juice absorption best?
The entire length of the intestinal tract (23 feet or 7 meters from the top opening
of the stomach to the anus) goes to work on enzymes in juices and takes them
into the bloodstream. But not too much nutrient absorption takes place in the
stomach, large intestine, and rectum.

Is there a “vital force” taken into the body from juice chinking? It’s strictly
our opinion, but we say “Yes!” The live enzymes in vegetables and fruits may
be absorbed into the physical, mental, and spiritual self and probably do
invigorate one’s soul. At least, we hope so.

Are the kidneys flushed more effectively if the recommended juices are
consumed? Yes, physiological testing has shown that juice enzymes are
cleansing agents — sometimes truly diuretic in nature. You can test this concept
yourself by juicing large, white asparagus and drinking the product. Drinking
celery juice is nearly as good a diuretic too. By drinking juices like these, you'll
then urinate a lot, resulting in well-flushed kidneys and a swabbed-out urinary
tract.

As stated, we do possess some opinions that come from our observations or
good scientifically based answers for questions you may put forth, but not for
all such questions.

SOME PERSONAL RULES ABOUT JUICING

Now we offer a bit of knowledge for you to assimilate. Since the therapeutic
enzymes in freshly produced plant juices do oxidize out of existence and into
free radical destruction by exposure to the oxygen in air for any prolonged
period, we must offer two parts of one definite rule to follow. Although
compromises may be inevitable, the ensuing two-part rule comes from
representatives who offer telephone advice when you call for it at the Gerson
Institute:

1. If at all possible, try to freshly prepare each of your 8-ounce glasses of
juice and drink them down immediately. This is especially important
for the very ill patient.

2. Inthe morning, do not prepare all juices for drinking during the day in
order to store them for later use, because before the day’s end you'll
probably be swallowing deficient juice with many nutrients missing.
Thirteen Glasses 117

TYPES OF JUICING DEVICES

Partly on an intuitive belief but mostly observing results in his patients, Dr.
Gerson presumed that the method of juice extraction decidedly affected the
concentration of nutrients his patients took into their bodies. Forty years after
his death, we know from analyses of juices produced by each type of juicing
device that some machines are better than others for the production of quality
drinking liquids. Also, the clinical results experienced by patients using each
type of juicer provide further support for Dr. Gerson’s original presumptions.
Although there are six types of juicers manufactured, which we will describe
briefly, our preference focuses on one particular product type. We will cite the
lesser machines first and move on to the best kind to use for the Gerson
Therapy program — discussed near the end of this section.

Below are descriptions of the forms of juicing mechanisms which do
produce vegetable and fruit juices but, compared to the sixth one that we
prefer, a few of them hardly provide anything really drinkable in acceptable
qualities and quantities.

1. Masticating Juicers

Masticators, as the term describes, chew up the vegetables or fruits and
extract their juices in one step. The juice quality is fairly good, but the amount
of vegetable or fruit pulp remaining is excessive with some of the plant
enzymes being left behind in so much pulp. While the juice produced by
masticators is richer in nutrients than that from centrifugal juicers (see below),
it is less nourishing than what's acquired from the type of triturator or
grinder/press that we prefer (see the sixth device to be described). Also, a
masticating juicer heats up inside its grinding chamber, which tends to damage
the enzymatic quality of the resulting juice. Manufactured brands of
masticating juicers include the Champion®, the Green Power®, and the
Royal®. Their prices are moderate and range between U.S.$225 and U.S.$700.

2. Centrifugal Juicers

By far the most common and least expensive of the juice extractors,
centrifugal juicers are also the least desirable for fulfilling requirements of a
patient on the Gerson Therapy.

A centrifugal juicer works by pushing the vegetable or fruit part against a
rotating disk whose teeth reduce it to pulp. Centrifugal force then throws the
plant pulp against a basket screen through which the juice is strained, while the
pulp remains behind. Such a mechanism sounds just right, but there are
problems with the centrifugal procedure.
118 THE GERSON THERAPY

a. The produce does not get ground finely enough, particularly in the
green leafy sort of vegetable.

b. The centrifugal force is less effective than the pressing action of other
juicers in extracting juice. Such inadequate pressing causes minerals
and phytochemicals in the pulp to remain in the pulp; thus, the juice
that’s rendered is lower in healing enzymes and other nutrients.

c. Dr. Gerson said about centrifugal juicers, “When the grinding wheel
rotates against a resistance with insufficient access of air, positive
electricity is produced and induces negative electricity on the
surrounding wall. The exchange of positive and negative [ions] kills
the oxidizing enzymes and renders the juice deficient.” He went on to
say that his patients who utilized centrifugal juicers did not experience
healing successes with their self-administration of his therapy.?

Among the centrifugal juicers, those with a vertical-wall basket such as the
original Acme Juicerator® (which may no longer be manufactured) presents an
enzyme deficiency problem In contrast, centrifugal juicers with angled-wall
juicer baskets (currently popular because of vast amounts of promotion and
advertising) such as those found in the Juiceman®, the Braun®, the Hamilton-
Beach®, and others don’t have such a serious problem. Even so, centrifugal
juicers offer an overall lack of nutrients and a reduced quantity of juice when
compared with other types. As with the masticator juice machines, the
centrifugal types are moderately priced.

3. Wheatgrass Juicers

Being small and highly specialized devices, wheatgrass juicers are designed
specifically to extract the chlorophyll-laden juice of wheatgrass. The Gerson
Therapy does not use wheatgrass inasmuch as most patients find it to be
extremely harsh for assimilation by the stomach. Besides, the desirable
components in wheatgrass are already found in the Gerson green leaf juice,
which is recommended for ingestion two to four times every day and is much
easier on the digestive tract.

4. Citrus Juicers

Used for orange or grapefruit juicing exclusively, a citrus juice apparatus is a
reamer-type device that cannot be used for any other type of fruit or vegetable.
One should never use a citrus juicer that presses the skin. Dr. Gerson believed
that citrus was the least important juice for achieving a therapeutic effect and
added it primarily for the patient's convenience as a start to his or her day.
Thirteen Glasses 119

Spurred by the media hype of the Florida and California orange juice industries
(remember O. J. Simpson and the slogan his former fans called out to him:
‘Juice! Juice! Juice!’’), many people drink orange juice as their first act in the
morning.

Even so, orange juice has been described by nutritionists as bringing on too
much mucus formation when large quantities are consumed. In our opinion, it
may be better for you to replace grapefruit and orange juices with either apple
juice or carrot juice. Citrus juices should not be used by patients suffering from
collagen diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or lupus erythematosus.

5. Blender/Liquefiers

Certain liquefying machines like the Vita-Mix® Total Nutrition Center are
powerful blenders and not really juicers at all. They grind the produce into a
fine pulp, but they don’t extract its juice. Since there is no reduction of bulk
with a blender/liquefier, to derive the nutrients equivalent to those in 104
ounces of freshly produced organic plant juice, a person would need to ingest
an alarming quantity of produce. According to our calculations, it would
amount to at least 6 pounds of carrots, 8 pounds of apples, and four heads of
lettuce every day, in addition to eating three regular meals. That's much too
much bulk food for anyone to take into one’s digestive tract in a twenty-four-
hour period, especially very ill people with little appetite and disturbed
digestive systems.

Yet any juicer is better than no juicer at all. Even the less effective type of
juice machine will furnish more nutrients than might be consumed in the
equivalent quantity of produce.

But don’t let price be the governing factor in choosing your juicing device.
At the Gerson Institute, observations have repeatedly been made that some
patients rigorously following the Gerson Therapy by use of a lower-cost
centrifugal juicer have failed to experience either reductions in tumor masses or
healing reactions even after many weeks on the program. However, when they
switched to the grinder/press juicer we're about to describe, their healing
reactions occurred rapidly, and many saw dramatic improvements in their
conditions. Be advised, therefore, that the choice of an appropriate juicer may
be a life-or-death matter.

Among the various kinds of juice machines marketed today, we prefer only
a couple of brands coming from the one particular extractor type to which we
have alluded. We'll now discuss this sixth kind of juicer.

6. The Triturator (Grinder)/Press Combination
Possessing a grinder or triturator for turning vegetables and fruits into a
120 THE GERSON THERAPY

fine, juicy pulp and a hydraulic press for extracting the juice’s enzymes from
this pulp, the particular juicer—a triturator (grinder)/press combination
machine—is the most acceptable choice for people suffering from serious
degenerative diseases, especially for cancer patients. It is the juicer type of our
preference. After grinding (the definition of “trituration’”’), juice is extracted
from vegetable or fruit pulp by being squeezed under high pressure of as much
as 2,000 pounds per square inch (PSI).

Dr. Gerson recommended this type of machine above all others and
suggested to his patients that they mix the pulp of different vegetables or fruits
together thoroughly before pressing to enhance the extraction of certain
nutrients. Such a course of action is possible only with a juicer that separates
the grinding and pressing functions. Research indicates that Dr. Gerson’s
selection of a grinder (triturator)/press type of machine produces as much as
fifty times higher amounts of certain essential nutrients such as the lycopene in
ripe tomatoes or the proanthocyanidin in the seed membranes of grapes, both
of which have proven anticancer qualities.

Taken from a triturator/press type of device, the vegetable or fruit juice is
much fuller-bodied than that produced by other kinds of juicers. Moreover, it is
free of pulp and furnishes about a 35 percent greater quantity of juice from the
same amount of raw produce that might have been put through other juicing
machines. Green leafy vegetables offer up even more quantity when processed
by a triturator (grinder)/press extractor. You can see that we favor such a
juicing device over others, and, in fact, both authors own and use this type of
machine many times daily.

But the triturator (grinder)/press extractor is expensive. And only two
manufacturers produce it, the Norwalk® Juicer Sales and Service Company
and the K & K Company. According to the model chosen, prices for the two
kinds of triturator (grinder)/press extractor are the most expensive of all the
juicers. They range in retail cost from U.S.$800 to U.S.$2,095. From a survey we
conducted, no less than four out of every five Gerson Therapy patients have
chosen to invest in a triturator (grinder)/press extractor for participating in
their self-administration of personal treatments or for merely enjoying the
deliciousness of freshly squeezed organic vegetable and fruit juices.

When considering your investment in a juicer, therefore, know that the
higher-priced triturator (grinder)/ press machine produces more juice from less
produce than other types and most likely offers greater value in the long run.
Given the quantity of produce used by an individual on the Gerson Therapy,
the more expensive juicer will, in our judgment, probably pay for itself in less
than a year.
Thirteen Glasses 121

How to Juice without Undergoing a Nervous
Breakdown:

Whatever the juicing apparatus one uses, to produce various juices without
undergoing a nervous breakdown, particularly during the beginning weeks of
the Gerson Therapy program, we have some helpful hints to offer.

The patient or the patient's support person will be spending three to five
hours of each waking day in front of the juicer producing the healing liquids
that impart nourishment to body parts, tissues, and cells which have been
lacking them (That's one of the reasons the patient's immune system is
performing in a lesser manner than it’s supposed to.) So, here is our series of
what we anticipate will be helpful suggestions:

* Place the machine in a location that’s pleasant to view —in front of a
picture window, next to the sound of music, close to favorite pho-
tographs, and so on.

* Since wash water for the juicer will be required regularly, have the
machine’s location be near the sink.

* Because the juice goes in undesirable directions on occasion, it’s a good
practice to place the device on a large cafeteria tray to save your
countertop from excessive washing.

¢ It's not uncommon for vegetable pulp (especially carrots and green leafy
items) to end up on the ceiling — especially during the first weeks of the
juicing regimen. But this occurrence may be minimized by holding the
flat of your hand over the open-mouth tube into which the produce is
fed. Without letting your fingers get ground with the vegetables, this
action will stop produce splatters and feedback.

* Wear a large apron to protect your clothing from such splatters too.

¢ Figure in advance how many carrots, apples, greens, peppers, chard, red
cabbage, and other produce will be required for each day’s juicing. Then
scrub and wash them in advance, cut them into smaller pieces, and bag
them in sufficient quantity for each session of juicing.

* Consider making your clothes washer into a giant “salad spinner” by
putting greens for the day into a mesh bag and running them through
the “damp dry’ cycle on the washer for twenty seconds to get rid of the
excess water.
THE GERSON THERAPY

Use small pillowcases wrapped inside a large garbage bag to hold all of the
day’s greens and keep them from getting limp before use.

Purchase vegetables and fruits several times each week to ensure their
freshness. Don’t let them sit around for an entire week before they are
turned into juice. This suggestion relates to green leafy items in particular.
Still, you may need a second refrigerator.

Of course, acquire only organically grown produce, and at all costs avoid
plant life that’s come in contact with chemicals such as pesticides and
herbicides. Chemicals on fruits and vegetables are a major reason that
degenerative diseases of all types cause disability and death. Degenerations
are known to some members of every family in the form of pathological
symptoms.

Inasmuch as some organic produce becomes unavailable when it goes out of
season (such as apples), it’s advantageous to arrange in advance with your
produce distributor for you or the support person to buy and pay for a
couple of months’ supply (but greens won't keep), to be held in the
distributor's cooler until needed by the patient.

If you can afford it, install your own walk-in cooler for the advance storage
of out-of-season produce.

After each juicing, try to disassemble the machine and wash its separate
parts. It’s tempting to do this after every third or fourth juicing, but be
aware that bacteria or other unwelcome microorganisms may lodge on the
food debris.

Use of a sink disposal unit and a sink sprayer hose makes it easier to clean
the juicing apparatus.

For a press-type juicer such as the Norwalk®, rinse off pulp from the
pressing cloths, wring them out, place in Ziploc® bags, and store them in
the freezer. Such an action keeps them microorganism-free.

Once a week, boil the pressing cloths in purified water.

If, after some time, the juice taste is “off’ or “pulp explosions” occur too
frequently, the fault probably will lie with overused cloths. It’s time to
replace them because the cloths’ pores become clogged with fibers from the
pulped juice.

If work or travel make it difficult to produce fresh juices during the day,
here is the procedure to follow. Acquire a glass-lined or stainless steel
vacuum bottle (Thermos®) and fill it with juice completely to avoid excess
air exposure. Avoid storing green juices, but carrot/ apple juice may be
stored.
Thirteen Glasses 125

From our observations over a quarter of a century of advising on the Gerson
Therapy, we've arrived at some insights. A main one is that degenerative
disease patients who make and consume juices throughout the day have a
higher rate of healing success than those people who regularly prepare juices
several hours in advance of drinking them.

Numbers of recipes have been devised by exponents of the Gerson Therapy
juicing program. Patients and other supporters of the Gerson Institute have
created various formulations for juice combinations. For instance, there are
recipes for carrot/apple juice, carrot juice by itself, citrus juice, green leaf juice,
and many additional ones. Most of these recipes are presented in chapter 22.
Our final suggestion is to check out this last chapter of our book and use its
recipes to your advantage.

References for Chapter Nine

1. Winter, R. A Consumer's Dictionary of Medicines: Prescription, Over-the-
Counter, and Herbal, plus Medical Definitions New York: Crown Trade
Paperbacks, 1993, p. 343.

2. The Gerson Institute. Gerson Therapy Practitioner's Training Seminar
Workbook. Chula Vista, Calif: The Gerson Institute, 1996, pp. 17, 18.

3. ibid, p. 19.

4. The Gerson Support Group. The Little Juicing Book. Chula Vista, Calif.: The
Gerson Institute.
Chapter Ten

THE GERSON SALTLESS
DIET

I n April 1997, Celia Collins, aged fifty-eight, a professional puppeteer,
arrived at the Gerson clinic in Sedona, Arizona (now closed), diagnosed
with breast cancer. Her pathology was described in medical records she had
brought with her as “an infiltrating ductal carcinoma (closed margins) of the
right breast 1.5 centimeters in diameter and involving three lymph nodes.” The
tumor was classified by the woman’s oncologist as stage II cancer at grade III
(most aggressive) and non-estrogen-receptive. In April 1997, the computerized
axial tomography (CAT) scan that Mrs. Collins had undergone also showed
some areas that doctors declared they needed to “watch” on her liver and lung.

She chose to receive a lumpectomy breast procedure, after which the
attending oncologist recommended that six months of chemotherapy be carried
out. But her breast surgeon did not agree. He said that in his experience such a
series of toxic chemical treatments had never prolonged anyone's life and he
would not suggest that she accept chemotherapy. The oncologist also wanted
Mrs. Collins to take seven weeks of radiation therapy with some extra radiation
“swats” for the closed margins. The breast surgeon did not express enthusiasm
for radiotherapy either.

“I was staggered by being confronted with the oncologist’s negative choices.
They just did not add up and so I began to look for some options. I selected the
Gerson Therapy rather than accept the chemo and radiation/’ Mrs. Collins
stated for publication. (To see this former cancer patient, you may view her
Thirteen Glasses 127
photograph on the facing page).
128 THE GERSON THERAPY

Celia Collins

She was intrigued with Dr. Gerson’s saltless diet, for the woman had for
years suspected that most of us take in too much salt by excessive seasoning.
And she often experienced cellular edema (swelling) from the sodium chloride
added to foods. So Mrs. Collins thought she would adapt well to the Gerson
therapeutic saltless eating program Thus, she immediately embarked on the full
menu plan of the Gerson Therapy.

“The decision made, my daughter and I took off for the Gerson Healing
Center in Sedona where we involved ourselves in the healing atmosphere. It
was so refreshing and invigorating. Everyone was exceedingly positive, happy,
and encouraging, even the cleaning lady. The care, the wonderful saltless food,
the other patients and staff. . . were all special and good. As a result, my healing
took place swiftly. I underwent another C AT scan in September 1997, after being
on the Gerson Therapy for six months, and all of the scans were reported as
clear of cancer—my lesions are gone. And it’s official from my breast surgeon
too, who additionally re-
ported on my diagnostic tests. He said that I am free of cancer without having
taken any chemotherapy or radiation,” said Celia Collins. “I’m so happy!”
The Gerson Saltless Diet 129

WHY THERE IS NEED OF A SALTLESS DIET

A main therapeutic concept put forth by Dr. Max Gerson is that elevating
the cancer patient's potassium level while restricting sodium in the diet acts
against tumor formation. Dr. Gerson was a strong exponent of eating a saltless
diet to eliminate the retained sodium (chemical symbol Na), chloride (indicated
as Cl), and water (H,0), together with toxins and poisons from the tissues all
over the body. Dr. Gerson wrote that NaCl (salt) excretion increases in
tuberculosis, cancer, and other chronic diseases after two to three days on a
saltless diet.

This increased salt excretion stays at the higher level for up to two weeks,
when it drops to normal on the saltless diet. Sometimes purgative flare-ups in
the form of nausea, diarrhea, and nervous disturbances occur. They have been
identified as “healing reactions” by the Gerson Institute. Such reactions come
from greater bile secretion and stimulation of the visceral nervous system. After
each flare-up, the reacting patients feel easier and improve both physically and
mentally.2

Freeman Cope, M.D., writing in the peer-reviewed journal Physiological
Chermstry and Physics, said: “The high potassium, low sodium diet of the Gerson
Therapy has been observed experimentally to cure many cases of advanced
cancer in man, but the reason was not clear. Recent studies [this was in 1978}
from the laboratory of Dr. F. G. Ling and associates indicate that high
potassium, low sodium environments can partially return damaged cell
proteins to their normal undamaged configuration. Therefore, the damage in
other tissues, indicated by toxins and breakdown products from the cancer, is
probably partly repaired by the Gerson Therapy through this mechanism”?

Much more needs to be explained about ingesting no salt and adding
potassium, sodium’s mineral antagonist. We discuss potassium below. Not
only does elevated blood pressure improve from high potassium usage and
reduced sodium intake, but the saltless diet is responsible for reversing both
acute and chronic illnesses of all types such as arthritis, diabetes, multiple
sclerosis, cardiovascular disease, autoimmune diseases, chronic fatigue
syndrome, and many others. In fact, each of the fifty-two
disorders listed in this book which react positively to Dr. Gerson’s dietary
program, exemplified by patient case histories, respond exceedingly well to
avoiding the ingestion of salt. Too much sodium consumption can be a killer!

ALBERT SCHWEITZER SAYS THE WHITE MAN'S SALTED DIET

HARMS BLACK AFRICANS
In 1954, the much heralded humanitarian, concert organist, medical
130 THE GERSON THERAPY

missionary and Nobel laureate Professor Dr. Albert Schweitzer, M.D., wrote
that the black Africans residing all around the area of his Lambarene hospital in
Gabon, French Equatorial Africa, had been altering their dietary practices and
adapting to the salted diet of white people. Dr. Schweitzer’s medical efforts on
their behalf were being made more difficult because of the people’s elevated
salt intake.

“Many natives, especially those who are living in larger communities, do not
now live the same way as formerly — they lived almost exclusively on fruits and
vegetables, bananas, cassava, ignam, taro, sweet potatoes and other fruits. They
now have begun to live on condensed milk, canned butter, meat-and-fish
[salted] preserves and bread,” Dr. Schweitzer wrote. He traced the appearance
of cancer, appendicitis, and other degenerative diseases among black Africans
to this dietary change.*

“Based upon my own experience, going back to 1913,1 can say, if cancer
occurred at all [then], it was very rare but that it has become more frequent
since. ... Itis obvious to connect the fact of increase of cancer with the increased
use of salt by the natives,” the Nobel laureate continued. “For the past forty
years, practical experience was gathered about the effects of salt limitation upon
diseases of the kidneys. It was shown just here that radical limitation of salt
intake, which corresponds to the usual saltless nutrition, decreases the burden
on the [black Africans’] diseased kidneys. As soon as the diseased kidneys are
not over-irritated and over-burdened by the excessive intake of chlorides in
mutrition, they recover in an amazingly short time and. . . eliminate more NaCl
on a saltless diet than on the salt-rich diet!”

When salt is removed, however, need something else be substituted? Some

nutritional supplements, especially potassium, are in order. While
the composition of all nutritional supplements used as part of the Gerson
Therapy is the subject of our chapter 11, potassium’s efficacy is discussed
immediately below.

THE USEFULNESS OF POTASSIUM FOR HUMAN METABOLISM

Potassium (chemical symbol K) is a mineral element needed by all plants
and animals to live and thrive. It is the essential mineral required within all
tissues and cells in the body for normal smooth function and for all their
activities. Since it is required in the cells, not in the fluids, it is referred to as the
“4ntercellular” mineral. Potassium is contained in all foods, particularly in
fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. Animal sources, such as fish and meat, also
contain potassium, but the plant-based material is easier to absorb.

Potassium is absorbed from foods through the intestinal tract; any excess is
The Gerson Saltless Diet 131

released in the urine. The kidneys play an important role in determining how
much potassium is released or absorbed into the system If the kidneys are
irritated by chemicals, drugs or other problems, they may release too much
potassium, contributing to a deficiency. Potassium can also be lost through
vomiting, diarrhea and surgical drainage, as well as laxatives and diuretics
(agents that increase the flow of urine). Loss through the skin is rare but it can
result from sweating during too much exercise or when overheated.>

Part of the Gerson Therapy involves consuming a diet not only loaded with
high-potassium foods but also supplemented with elevated doses of the mineral
itself. In fact, from the Faculty of Life Sciences at Bar-Ilan University in Ramat-
Gan, Israel, Professor Jacob Shoham, M.D., Ph.D., commented about potassium
quantities in his friendly and informed September 28, 1998, letter of inquiry to
Charlotte Gerson. Dr. Shoham wrote, “Potassium obviously is a central pillar in
the whole structure of Dr. Gerson’s therapy. We are dealing here with
enormous amounts of K— about 20 grams in the [supplemental] potassium
solution during the first four weeks, reduced to half thereafter, about nine to ten
grams in the juices, and probably two to three grams in the food, all together
about thirty grams per day during the first weeks and then twenty grams per
day subsequently.”

Dr. Jacob Shoham was concerned about the possibility of hyperkalemia, an
overabundance of potassium in a person’s metabolism, which could possibly
occur from a patient's conforming to the Gerson Therapy recommendation of K
supplemention. Yet adverse signs or symptoms of hyperkalemia are not an
effect from the high dose of potassium supplementation. Several Gerson
Therapy patients have accidentally, through misinterpretation of labeling, self-
medicated with potassium at levels approximately thirty-two times the
recommended dosage of K for periods of up to three weeks. They did this
without undergoing any significant adverse effects. Over time, from experience
of users, elevating K intake to neutralize too much sodium (Na) in the tissues
appears to be safe and effective. Excess K is easily excreted by normal kidneys.

Also, more than forty years ago, Dr. Gerson answered the hyperkalemia
question in his celebrated book. He declares: “The content of potassium in the
serum is, in many cases, misleading.” Then he goes on to say, “It [potassium in
serum] does not give any definite indication of an increasing or decreasing
amount of K present in the tissues of essential organs... . More coincident
examinations of K made at the same time in serum and tissues and in different
stages of the [cancerous] disease, are necessary for such decisions.”°

Dr. Gerson advises that hyperkalemia occurs from seven specific sources: (1)
“loss of fluids —blood, in majority of cases dehydration’; (2) “Epilepsy —most
cases”; (3) “Cancer patients more often in the period before they go over to the
terminal stage (on the way to elimination)’; (4) “Never in cancer patients
132 THE GERSON THERAPY

during restoration time’; (5) ‘Addison's disease’; (6) “Anuria—uremia
(inability of liver and kidneys to excrete excess potassium in solution —lost from
essential organs)’; (7) “Acute and chronic asthma, and other degenerative
allergies.””

Potassium belongs to a chemical group that is associated with both
phosphoric acids and carbohydrates, and the three substances readily combine
with colloids; therefore, Dr. Gerson suggests that we may speak of these four
grouped ingredients of the metabolism as the potassium group. Na is part of its
own chemical group, the sodium group.

We take in an enormous amount of sodium, not necessarily with the foods
we prepare ourselves but with those we purchase already packaged, especially
those mixed ingredients that people eat in restaurants. Dining outside the home
is an unhealthy way to eat and live. It’s an underlying source of degenerating
illnesses such as high blood pressure, stroke, and cancer.

In his monthly newsletter Health & Healing®, Julian Whitaker, M_D.,
1J I ME UEKSON THERAPY

writes, “The way to bring your sodium-potassium ratio back into balance is
to eat lots of vegetables, legumes, whole grains, and fruit. These wholesome
foods naturally have an excellent sodium-to-potassium ratio of at least 1:50.” Dr.
Whitaker adds that some fruits, such as oranges, offer a good mineral
proportion of 1 part sodium to 260 parts potassium Bananas have an even more
ideal sodium-to-potassium content of 1:440."8 However, bananas are too high in
sugars, especially for cancer patients. They may be eaten only in moderation.

POTASSIUM SUPPLEMENTATION ON THE GERSON THERAPY

At the Gerson Therapy hospitals, when patients are beginning their
therapeutic programs, blood tests and urinalyses are performed once a week.
This would be the case when someone is under the care of a Gerson certified
practitioner as well. Monitoring of blood and urine values of patients on a
continuous basis is of great importance.

Monitoring laboratory tests should be repeated about every six weeks,
depending upon the severity of an individual's disease process. In the early
stages with the debilitated patient, every four weeks would be recommended.
These laboratory studies must accompany numerous clinical examinations. One
of the most important laboratory tests involves the determination of the blood
serum’s potassium levels. K levels for sick Gerson patients will often fall
between 5.9 and 6 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L). Normal ranges for non-
Gerson patients generally record at 3.4 to 5.1 mEq/L.°

Particularly in the initial stages of treatment, Gerson patients ingest
significant potassium supplementation of up to 150 mEq/day. Even in the
presence of elevated potassium serum levels, it's necessary to continue K
supplementation. Dr. Gerson tells us that K ions are indispensable in certain
enzymatic reactions and K plays a role in tissue protein synthesis. Normally,
muscles, brain, and liver possess much higher K content than Na content. As
long as K remains normal, Na is diminished, and that’s maintaining a healthy
state.

At the Gerson Therapy hospitals, after blood testing upon the patient's
hospital admission, 10 percent potassium solution is administered immediately.
The K administration takes the form of 4 teaspoonfuls ten times daily added to
alljuices, and this dose usually continues for three to four
The Gerson Saltless Diet 133

weeks. Then the amount of K is reduced to half. Presenting a warning, Dr.
Gerson says, “The combination of the blood level with the clinical observations
teaches us that the restoration of the potassium content in the organs is a
difficult and long-drawn-out process.”10

A compound solution of potassium salts is made from 33 grams (g) each of
potassium acetate, monophosphate, and gluconate, diluted in 32 ounces of
distilled water. As stated, dosages vary from 1 to 4 teaspoonfuls (tsp),
representing from 3.5 to 14 grams of K per day. This medication is added in
equal amounts to each of the carrot/apple, greens, and orange juices (but not to
the pure carrot juices) daily, about 1 to 4 tsp perjuice drink.

Further information about nutritional supplementation with potassium
compound salts is provided in chapter 11. We place emphasis on medicating
with potassium because it forms a keystone for achieving healing benefits from
use of the Gerson Therapy. This K medication is primary to the treatment of
tissue damage syndrome (the penetration of Na into tissues), found in all
cancers and in most other degenerative diseases. It combines with the other
medications and dietary regimen to increase cellular K levels, reduce
intercellular edema, and restore normal cell function.

As we alluded before, patients have experienced some misunderstandings
using this high-dose K medication, even though instructions are provided on
the container. You must dilute the contents of the container holding the
concentrated K powder into 32 ounces of water. Spoon the diluted liquid you
have created into the juices. Do not spoon the powder itself into the juices or
you will be mixing in an overabundant dose. No adverse side effects occur at
this usual dosage, except perhaps for an irritation in the throat due to the strong
potassium salts. Eating oatmeal gruel heals the potential throat irritation.

Store the potassium solution in a glass container rather than in plastic or
metal. It needs no refrigeration but should be held in a dark closet (pantry) or
stored in a brown- or amber-colored bottle or jar. One quart of potassium
solution will last from one to three weeks, depending on the prescribed dosage.
Discard any of the remaining potassium solution and replace it if, after some
time has elapsed, it becomes cloudy.

POTASSIUM COMPOUND FOR ONE'S ENEMA SOLUTION
The same potassium solution that is added to juices for drinking may be
applied directly to enemas for the relief of abdominal spasms that occur from
colon contractions. The dosage of this potassium compound consists of 2 to 3
tsp of K solution placed into each enema. At times, lesser amounts of water
combined with the potassium compound for enemas may be required simply
because the abdominal spasms may be too great to accept any increased liquid

pressure into one’s colon. Discontinue adding potassium compound to the
134 THE GERSON THERAPY

coffee enema after six to eight days or it will cause irritation of the colon.

TISSUE DAMAGE SYNDROME FROM CELLULAR POISONING

According to a 1977 published report by Freeman Cope, M_D., a pioneering
physician and research physicist, medical science has learned that cellular
structures become poisoned by exposure to carcinogens, atherogens, antigens,
allergens, and other offending pollutants in our surroundings. The cellular
pollutants may cause oxygen starvation, trauma, generalized insult, or other
tissue damage of the cells that takes the form of a syndrome, a series of
symptoms and signs that manifest themselves in a repeated pattern. Any part of
the body can undergo tissue damage syndrome, a cycle of cellular destruction,
which Dr. Cope defines as “the damaged configurational state in which the cell
proteins lose their preference for association with K+ rather than Na+, and the
water content of the cell increases (the cell swells).”2

As described by Dr. Cope, the tissue damage syndrome presents an ill patient's
dysfunctional cells with this series of pathological symptoms:

1. The damaged cells lose potassium.
2. The involved cells readily accept sodium.
3. The cells swell with too much water.

The symptom that may be recognized most readily by the attending health
professional is then labeled cellular edema. Cellular edema does not allow for the
manufacture of energy in the form of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP). ATP is the energy storage compound of the body; it’s the
energy currency that results from burning sugar through oxidation. ATP gets
manufactured, then it’s used up, is manufactured again, and becomes used once
more on a continuous basis. During the course of this metabolic process, ATP
liberates bursts of energy for cellular use. ATP is an adenosine molecule
possessing three strong phosphate bonds that contain the required energy. The
cell must have ATP or it dies. If enough cells die, tissue dies. If too many tissues
die, an organ or body part dies. If too many organs die, the person dies.

When an excessive amount of water is present in the cell, the production of
ATP is inhibited or stops altogether. At the same time, protein synthesis and
lipid (fat) metabolism stops. On the Gerson Therapy, the damaged cell is
confronted with less sodium, is allowed to bind with potassium, is delivered of
The Gerson Saltless Diet 135

its excess water content, and is improved in its mitochondrial function. Certain
organelles, those tiny chemical factories inside of each cell called mutochondna,
perform the energy functions of burning sugar with oxygen, synthesizing
protein, and metabolizing fats.

To eliminate the excess cellular water which shows up as edema, before Dr.
Freeman Cope described and named tissue damage syndrome, Max Gerson was
treating the condition as far back as the 1920s. Dr. Gerson eliminated sodium
from the diet, fashioned an eating program that was high in potassium,
supplemented the diet with additional potassium, and developed the means to
remove from the bloodstream toxins that inhibit normal cellular enzyme
functions, metabolism, and respiration.

To paint a defining picture of just what tissue damage syndrome is, think of
Dr. Cope’s discovery in this way. See the cell as an industrialized nation with its
mitochondria as the nation’s industrial cities. They are the cities of industry.
When a cell (as the nation) has lost potassium, gained sodium, and swollen with
water, it’s equivalent to all of its cities’ sewers backing up. Then the industrial
cities are shut down in their function. Energy cannot be made by the cities of
industry to clean out the sewers. The entire industrialized nation (that damaged
cell) becomes overpolluted, becomes severely dysfunctional in every facet of its
existence, and dies. Tissue damage syndrome has been the responsible agent for
cellular death.

By eating the saltless diet and supplementing with elevated doses of
potassium, clinically indiscernible but laboratory-measurable tissue damage
syndrome can be avoided. During the time that Dr. Max Gerson was writing his
life-saving book, A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases and

The Cure of Advanced Cancer by Diet Therapy: A Summary of 30 Years of Clinical
Experimentation, this information was published in the American Cancer
Society's health professionals’ journal Cancer. There is no better means of
removing the puffy malfunctioning sphere of partial metabolites and cellular
edema from diseased tissue materials than application of the Gerson
Therapy's saltless and high-potassium diet.

References for Chapter Ten

1. Regelson, W “The ‘grand conspiracy’ against the cancer cure.”
Commentary, Journal of the American Medical Association 243:337-339, jan.

25, 1980.

2. Gerson, M. A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases and The Cure of
Advanced Cancer by Diet Therapy. A Summary of 30 Years of Clinical
Experimentation, 6th edition. Bonita, Calif: The Gerson Institute, 1999, pp. 164-
166.
136 THE GERSON THERAPY

3. Cope, EW. “A medical application of the Ling association-induction hy-
pothesis: the high potassium, low sodium diet of the Gerson cancer therapy.”
Physiological Chenustry and Physics, NMR. 10:465-468, 1978.

4. Schweitzer, A. Briefe aus dem Lambarenespital (Letters from the Lambarene
Hospital). Africa, 1954.

5. The Mosby Medical Encyclopedia. New York: New American Library, 1985,
p. 589.

6. Op. cit, Gerson, M., 1990, p. 93.

7. Ibid.

8. Whitaker, J. “Minerals, Part 3: Lower your blood pressure with the ‘K
factor’. Health e? Healing® 9:1-3, June 1999.

9. The Gerson Institute. Gerson™ Therapy Practitioner's Traimng Seminar
Workbook. Bonita, Calif: The Gerson Institute, 1996, p. 31.

10. Op. cit., Gerson, M., 1990, pp. 208, 209.

11 .Op. cit., Cope, EW, 1978.

12. Waterhouse, C.; Craig, A. “Body-composition and changes in patients
with advanced cancer.” Cancer. 11(6), November/December, 1957.
Chapter Eleven

NUTRITIONAL
SUPPLEMENTS ON THE
DIET

L iving in upstate New York, forty-two-year-old Tom Powers Jr. saw a mole
on his right temple as he stood at the mirror shaving. As a result of Mr.
Powers’ telephone description, his family doctor asked him to have it biopsied
right away and made the appointment with a pathology laboratory. By means
of a special instrument that pierces directly through the skin, a small cylindrical
specimen was removed by punch biopsy. Immediately thereafter, Tom Powers
learned that he had been struck by malignant melanoma.

As described in Chapter 6, malignant melanoma is a highly dangerous tumor
consisting of melanocytes, the melanin-forming cells. It usually occurs in the
skin, eye, and mucous membranes, often developing from excessive exposure to
sunlight. Spread of this skin cancer to other parts of the body, especially to the
lymph nodes and liver, is common. Melanin or its precursors (melanogens) are
excreted in the urine, and the skin may be deeply pigmented.

While Tom Powers waited, deciding what to do, metastatic melanoma
growths recurred, this time in three places: first on the biopsied operation site,
then on his chest, and finally on the left arm. These cancer resurgencies popped
out just eight days after the biopsy had been performed. It was apparent that the
patient's circumstances were life-threatening.

‘T consulted four different medical doctors, who agreed that neither surgery,
radiation, nor any known form of chemotherapy, alone or in combination,
offered hope for a cure of this type of cancer at this stage in its development. In
unvarnished terms, my situation was viewed as terminal,’ Tom Powers Jr.
wrote. (Mr. Powers’ photograph may be viewed below.)

The patient and his family learned from friends and a Gerson program
138 THE GERSON THERAPY

participant that the Gerson Therapy is highly successful as a treatment for
malignant melanoma. (We suggest, again, that you refer to chapter 6 for the
percentages of Gerson treatment success according to the melanoma tumor’s
staging.)

“The fact that my cancer had metastasized did not rule out the chances of
complete remission for me. I had avoided radiation therapy or chemotherapy
and this was in my favor; it meant that my immune system had not been
artificially suppressed and would respond better to this metabolic treatment
plan with its highly specialized nutritional supplements,’ advised Mr. Powers.
“The supplements consist of potassium salts, thyroid, Lugol's iodine solution,
pancreatic enzymes, and niacin, plus medicinal injections with vitamin Bp and
liver. Castor oil taken orally and by enema is used as a liver organ detoxifier
rather than as a nutritional supplement.

te

Tom Powers Jr.
“On May 14, 1982,1 began the Gerson Therapy and became expert at treating
myself at home. Dr. Gerson’s genius, to my eternal gratitude, had his nutritional

supplementation working beautifully. Remission occurred. By July 1, 1982, all
visible tumors were gone. They just faded away and the skin appeared normal
once again. I had no further surgery. I had no chemotherapy or radiation
therapy. When my family physician saw me next in September 1982, he was
deeply impressed to find the disease in permanent remission. I remained on the
Gerson Therapy for twenty months. I have had no recurrence of the cancer in
the fourteen years since,’ concluded Tom Powers Jr.
Nutritional Supplements on the Diet 139

According to guidelines presented by the American Cancer Society, this
patient has experienced a “cure.” From Tom Powers Jr., the last report that he
furnished about his prolonged remission or cure of malignant melanoma
arrived at the Gerson Institute during December 2000. To date, he has
flourished in excellent health for eighteen years.

NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS ADVOCATED BY DR. GERSON

As mentioned by Tom Powers, there are just a few nutritional supplements
used in the Gerson Therapy. Iodine supplements in the form of Lugol's solution
are utilized, for example. Lugol's solution (as described in the US.
Pharmacopeia), often incorporated into medicines, consists of 5 grams of iodine
and 10 grams of potassium iodide per 100 milliliters (mL) of purified water.

Raw liver juice had been an integral part of the Gerson vegetable-and- fruit-
juice-drinking procedure until 1989. Then, because of bacterial and parasitic
contamination of most commercially available domestic animal livers from
calves, the practice of drinking raw liver juice had to be discontinued. Liver
injections can be continued by the patient instead. Also, supplementing with
coenzyme Qio helps to replace some of the raw liver substances. (Chapter 12
discusses about the importance of detoxifying or cleansing the liver.)

In addition to liver detoxification, pancreatic enzyme tablets are always
prescribed along with potassium compound, potassium iodide, thyroid extract,
niacin, and hydrochloric acid as well as pepsin, a digestive enzyme. Niacin
forms part of the coenzyme NADH, which detoxifies the body of cancer-
causing pollutants.
Jtu THE GERSON THERAPY

That's all! In general, no other nutritional supplementation is required
because the organically grown vegetarian eating plan is massively packed with
natural nutrients. A degenerative disease patient participating in the Gerson
program becomes well once again and remains that way merely from eating
what nature offers as our bounty. We will explain everything there is to know
about the Gerson Therapy's form of nutrition, supplementation, and
detoxification starting immediately after this next section.

THE GERSON HIPPOCRATES SOUP

One of the main recommendations in Dr. Gerson’s nutritional program to
counter all types of acute and chronic diseases is that a person should eat a
daily quantity of vegetable soup —not Heinz’s™ or Campbell’s™ (both loaded
with salt), but soup that you make from scratch. (We furnish the recipe for
preparing Dr. Gerson’s special Hippocrates soup near the end of chapter 8 as a
discussion of the eating plan.) As we've stated, the Gerson special Hippocrates
soup is a staple for all patients for both lunch and dinner because it aids the
kidneys to accomplish their job of detoxification.

In addition to the Hippocrates soup itself, fresh vegetables are mandatory,
stewed in their own juices. The soup stock becomes loaded with nutrients. (In
Dr. Gerson’s time, neither he nor any member of the nutritional science
community had as yet identified the phytochemicals present in certain
vegetables.) Such phytochemicals ingested in this manner are easily absorbed
and assimilated. As you've been advised, informed nutritionists usually refer to
phytochemicals of this type as nutraceuticals, because they produce a
pharmaceutical-like effect in the body, almost like the individualized
components of nutritional supplements, but more easily assimilated.

Such good eating along with detoxification, as by giving oneself enemas
made from organic coffee, keeps the gut free of disease-producing waste
products, the liver clean, and the whole body system vigorous. What could be
better for managing your day? As you'll learn by reading chapter 12, the only
really healthy way to ingest coffee is by use of an enema bottle applied for its
assigned purpose.
Nutritional Supplements on the Diet 141

ADJUNCTIVE SUPPLEMENTATION WITH THYROID MEDICATION

In the next section you will learn that iodine is a trace element required in
the manufacture of thyroid hormone, and this is important because iodine
deficiency is a source of thyroid gland pathology. When such pathology occurs,
symptoms of long-term health difficulties appear (including a disturbed
immune system), and thyroid medication may be required. Thyroid medication,
in fact, is an integral part of the adjunctive nutrient supplementation in the
Gerson Therapy.

The thyroid gland adds iodine to the amino acid tyrosine to create the
several thyroid hormones. Because they regulate metabolism in each body cell,
a deficiency of thyroid gland hormones can affect virtually all body functions.
The severity of symptoms in adults ranges from extremely mild deficiency
states as in subclinical Inypothyroidism to severe deficiency which sometimes may
become life-threatening as in myxedema.1’2

Deficiency of thyroid hormone may come from defective hormone synthesis
or lack of stimulation by the pituitary gland, which secretes the thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH). When thyroid hormone levels in the blood are low,
the pituitary secretes TSH. If thyroid hormone levels are decreased and TSH
levels are elevated in the blood, this usually indicates defective thyroid
hormone synthesis, known as primary hypothyroidism If TSH levels are low and
thyroid hormone levels are also low, an endocrinologist will likely recognize
that the patient's pituitary gland is responsible for the low thyroid function.
Such a situation is referred to as secondary hypothyroidism,’

Because thyroid hormone enhances production of mitochondria, the tiny
chemical factories or organelles in each cell which produce cellular power
(ATP), Dr. Gerson made use of pure, desiccated thyroid gland as an adjunctive
supplemental medication for underactivity of the thyroid gland. The Gerson
Institute continues to recommend such a thyroid product, consisting of
desiccated pork thyroid gland, supplied in a dose of V2- or 1-grain tablets made
by the West Pharmaceuticals/Jones Medical Laboratories. The normal initial
treatment dosage for a cancer patient is 1.5 to 5 grains per day, tapering down
to 1 to 3 grains daily after three to ten weeks. The use of synthetic thyroid is not
recommended, because only the natural material relieves symptoms of
hypothyroidism on a permanent basis.

If thyroid causes the patient's heart to race up to 120 beats per minute
(tachycardia), overdosage with thyroid may be suspected, and this medication
should be discontinued, at least temporarily, and subsequently reduced. Also,
no thyroid medication is given during menstruation.

Adjunctive to supplementation with desiccated porcine (pig) thyroid is the
mineral iodine, which is a main chemical component of human thyroid
hormone. In the Gerson program, iodine is nutritionally supplemented in the
142 THE GERSON THERAPY
form of a solution (Lugol's) which has standard usage in orthodox medicine.

NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTATION WITH LUGOL'S SOLUTION

Named after its inventor, the French physician Jean Guillaume Auguste
Lugol, who lived from 1786 to 1851, Lugol’s solution is a deep brown liquid,
with the odor of iodine. It consists of the mineral iodine (chemical symbol I) and
potassium iodide (KI) dissolved in purified water. Each 100 mL of Lugol's
solution contains 4.5 to 5.5 grams of iodine and 9.5 to 10.5 grams of potassium.
iodide. Orthodox medicine, following United States Pharmacopeia guidelines,
uses this concentration, administered orally, as a source of the iodine mineral in
preparation for a patient undergoing thyroid surgery. It is also referred to as
compound todine solution

Lugol's solution works with potassium, the main base ion of intracellular
fluid. Acting together, Lugol’s solution and potassium are biochemically
synergistic medications that increase cellular energy of normal cells, reduce
intercellular edema, restore normal cellular functions, and elevate cellular
potassium levels. Being synergistic, they interact to produce increased activity
that is greater than the sum of the effects of the two substances given separately
to patients.

Max Gerson, M_D., applied a half-strength Lugol's solution consisting of 5
grams of potassium iodide plus 10 grams of iodine with water added to make
200 mL. The typical dosage for cancer patients not pretreated with
chemotherapy is three drops, six times per day. This is reduced after two or
three weeks to one drop six times a day. Patients treated with chemotherapy as
well as those with other degenerative diseases start with one drop six times per
day. After five to six weeks, this dosage is adjusted to three or four drops per
day.°

Lugol's solution becomes a critical factor in the control of the oxidation
rates of cells when it is administered correctly by adding it, with potassium
(see the section immediately below), to the orange and carrot/apple juices. It
shouldn’t be added to the green juice or pure carrot juice. Accuracy and
appropriate dosages of Lugol’s solution are essential for the success of the
Gerson Therapy.

The half-strength dosage is taken only during the first three to four weeks of
treatment in the following manner: put three drops in each of six orange and
carrot/apple juices so that one is consuming eighteen drops or six times three
drops of Lugol's solution daily. As mentioned, do not put Lugol's solution in
any of the green juices.

After the startup period, reduce the Lugol's solution dosage to only one drop
Nutritional Supplements on the Diet 143

in each of six juices daily for eight weeks. Then lower the dose to only one drop
in each of three juices per day for the duration of treatment.

When a patient is being treated at a Gerson Therapy hospital or by a certified
Gerson-trained physician in private practice, the Lugol's solution is premixed at
half strength to a 5 percent dilution. The product must be used as supplied and
not diluted further.”

The Lugol's solution works by causing iodine to invade cancer tumors when
inflamed. This situation may be especially significant for inflammatory skin
cancer such as inflammatory breast disease (carcinoma) and melanosarcoma
before healing sets in and again later in inflammatory flare-ups. The solution's
iodine is necessary in the control of normal cell differentiation. The larger dose
such as is used in the beginning weeks of the Gerson Therapy is favorable for
inhibiting excessive growth of tumor tissue.®

A similar physiological response to Lugol's solution occurs from the oral
ingestion of potassium compound salts, which cancel out the toxic products of
sodium compound salts. Potassium ions are the neutralizing factors for sodium
ions and actually react like antidotes to them

POTASSIUM COMPOUND SALTS

Dr. Gerson discovered that patients with chronic degenerative illnesses
exhibit a marked decrease of potassium (K), one of the elemental substances
important in enzyme production as well as muscle contraction and strength.
According to his research, the beginning of all chronic disease is the loss of K*
ions from the cells and invasion of sodium (Na*) ions into the cells — and with it
water. Such a situation (as we learned in chapter 10) brings on edema and the
resulting cellular/ physiological mal-
functions that go with it—loss of electrical potentials in the cells, improper
enzyme formation, reduced cell oxidation, other symptoms of tissue damage
syndrome (TDS), and worse. The building of almost all the body’s enzymes by
the cells requires K as a catalyst (activating agent). In contrast, Na permeating
the tissues inhibits (slows or stops) enzyme production. To stimulate enzymatic
action, therefore, it’s mandatory to eliminate excess Na and substitute K for the
cells’ use. At the same time, detoxification procedures will remove accumulated
intermediary substances and other interfering poisons.°

Besides detoxifying with coffee enemas (see the next chapter), the best way
to simultaneously pull sodium from the tissues and infuse them with
potassium is by drinking voluminous amounts of fresh fruit and vegetable
juices. The juices contain large quantities of K and cell-cleansing enzymes.
More than the juices alone, however, a solution of potassium compound salts
added to these juices ensures that K in quantity is ingested and assimilated.
144 THE GERSON THERAPY

As discussed in chapter 10, a solution of potassium compound salts is made
from 33 grams each of potassium acetate, potassium monophosphate, and
potassium gluconate, diluted in 32 ounces of distilled water. Typical potassium
dosages vary from 1 to 4 teaspoonfuls ten times per day of the prepared
solution, representing 3.5 to 14 grams of potassium daily. Such a quantity of
medication is added every day in equal amounts to each of the juices, including
carrot/apple, orange, and the greens but not the pure carrot juice.

The primary benefit these potassium compound salts offer is for their
treatment of TDS, found in all cancers, and in most other degenerative diseases.
The K compound combines with the other medications and dietary regimen to
accomplish similar effects to that of iodine. Potassium compound salts solution,
which needs no refrigeration, should be stored in a dark glass bottle, not plastic
or metal. Discard it if it becomes cloudy with age.1

As stated, K is synergistic with I, and together they reduce swelling in the
tissues, in part by pushing out Na.

ACIDOL PEPSIN

A general name for several enzymes of the gastric juice created in the
stomach, pepsin catalyzes the hydrolysis of proteins to form polypeptides. The
stomach’s parietal (wall) cells secrete enough hydrochloric acid (HC1) from the
blood to acidify the food predigested by saliva to a low pH of from 3.0 to 1.5.
This acidic pH temporarily deactivates the plant enzymes, and the predigested
food passes to the lower or pyloric portion of the stomach (the pylorus), from
which the stomach lining’s chief cells also secrete pepsin. In the pylorus, pepsin
continues the digestion of protein. Adequate HC1 is required to activate pepsin
from its inactive enzyme form pepsinogen inside the chief cells, and to
maintain the stomach pH below 3.0, the optimum pH at which pepsin does its
work.?2

Acidol pepsin is the most important of the three gastric enzymes by its
speeding along the hydrolysis of proteins with preferential cleavage at the
amino acid residues of phenylalanine, tryptophan, tyrosine, and leucine. Acidol
pepsin is secreted by the gastric mucosa in the form of pepsinogen and has an
optimum pH of 1.5 to 2.0.45

Acidol pepsin capsules (betaine HC1 and pepsin) are part of the Gerson
Therapy medications for purposes of aiding digestion of foods and juices. They
are the source of the supplemental hydrochloric acid that was administered by
Dr. Gerson and remain actively used today. Take them before each meal in a
dosage of two capsules three times a day, as a source of HC1.
Nutritional Supplements on the Diet 145

NIACIN (VITAMIN B,) SUPPLEMENTATION

Acting as a coenzyme in several important biochemical functions, miacin or
vitamin is involved in the metabolism of lipids (fats), gastrointestinal tract
functions, workings of the nervous system, and promotion of healthy skin
growth. An overwhelming number of scientific studies show that niacin is
effective in reducing both cholesterol and triglyceride levels in the blood;
moreover, vasodilatation (opening of the blood vessels promoting increased
circulation) is another cardiovascular benefit derived from niacin usage. It also
significantly increases high- density lipoproteins (HDL). Niacin reduces the
incidence of gastrointestinal cancer and the risk of gallbladder disease.14

The Optimum Daily Intake (ODI) for vitamin B> nutritional maintenance
supplementation varies from 25 mg to 300 mg daily; for therapeutic purposes,
however, Dr. Gerson had his patients take six 50-mg tablets of niacin daily for
six months. In advanced cases of cancer or other degenerative diseases he used
50 mg of niacin every hour around the clock (1,200 mg of niacin). By today’s
standards in accordance with the practice of orthomolecular medicine as first
recommended by a candidate for the
Nobel Prize in Medicine for 2001, Canadian orthomolecular psychiatrist Abram
Hoffer, M.D., Ph.D., 1,200 mg of niacin is a usual dose.151¢

Ingesting such an elevated dosage of niacin can create a skin-flushing effect
with temporary and harmless redness, heat, and itching. Dosing with niacin
should be discontinued during menstruation or any type of bleeding.

Note: The nicotinic form of niacin is being recommended here as a
medication for the Gerson Therapy and not the niacinamide (“no-flush’’) form,
which shows almost no beneficial effect for most degenerative diseases except
the arthritides such as osteoarthritis. If the niacin flush irritates the patient, take
the tablet after meals or let it dissolve under the tongue. It should not be
discontinued because it provides vasodilatation which improves blood
circulation, elevates skin temperature, increases oxygenation, promotes cellular
nutrition, and produces an overall detoxification effect. This also is a factor in
protein digestion.

PANCREATIN

An enzymatic secretion of the pancreas, the vital substance pancreatin
contains three specific groups of enzymes for the digestion and absorption of
food. They are lipases for absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins, annylases for
the breakdown of starch molecules into smaller sugars, and proteases for the
reconstruction of protein molecules into single amino acids. Each of these
enzyme groups contains separate enzymes; for instance, the proteases offer up
146 THE GERSON THERAPY

trypsin, chymotrypsin, and carboxypeptidase. The proteases also aid in the
breakdown of tumor tissue, scar tissue, or other damaged areas.

Supplementation with some or all of these pancreatin-derived enzymes is
employed in the treatment of impaired digestion, malabsorption, nutrient
deficiencies, and abdominal discomfort. They are useful for overcoming the
symptoms of digestive disturbances such as celiac disease; cystic fibrosis; food
allergies; the yeast syndrome; autoimmune disorders like rheumatoid arthritis,
lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, multiple sclerosis, and many types of
cancer; sports injuries and trauma; and viral infections such as herpes zoster
and AIDS.1”

In lectures to medical consumers, Dr. Gerson explained, “Pancreatin [as an
uncoated tablet] is given four times a day, three tablets each time. So they [the
cancer patients] always have plenty of trypsin, pepsin, lipase,
and diastase in their systems. The blood can carry this around and digest the
tumor masses wherever they may be.””18

In following the current Gerson Therapy protocol, the recommended dosage
of pancreatin for debulking a malignant tumor usually is three 325-mg tablets
four times a day. While a few people don’t tolerate pancreatin well, most
benefit, with less digestive trouble, gas spasms, and weakness. (It should not be
given to sarcoma patients.) Encouraged for use is a pancreatin tablet made
without cereal fillers that’s manufactured by the Key Company of St. Louis,
Missouri.

FLAXSEED OIL

With the Latin name Linum usitatissimum, the fresh oil of flaxseeds is the
richest edible product known containing the important omega-3 fatty acid
alpha-linolenic acid (a-LNA), which is mandatory for physical health. Flaxseed oil
is a primary therapeutic agent for fatty degeneration in cardiovascular disease,
cancer, diabetes, and other pathologies. Moreover, its LNA and other
components regulate blood pressure, platelet, kidney, immune system, and
arterial functions; reinforce the body’s inflammatory response; and play roles in
calcium and energy metabolism. Adjunctive conversion cofactors for turning
LNA into series 3 prostaglandins requires that one’s diet or nutritional
supplementation should provide vitamins B», Bs, and C, plus the minerals
magnesium and zinc.! (Prostaglandins are hormone-like fatty acids that act in
tiny amounts on internal organs and the autonomic and central nervous
systems.)

Dr. Gerson placed much value on the work of German lipid researcher
Johanna Budwig, Ph.D. (still living in her early nineties), who recommends flax
Nutritional Supplements on the Diet 147

oil for enemas in colon cancer and bowel obstruction. Research in North
America has finally discovered the value of flax oil’s LNA in treating smaller
tumors, metastases, inflammatory conditions, high triglycerides, cardiovascular
conditions, diabetes, weight loss, and other degenerative illnesses.

The Gerson Therapy requires a participant to use organic, cold-pressed flax
oil, such as that manufactured by Omega, Arrowhead Mills, Barleans, or other
branded names produced by the Organo process. But users should never heat
the oil as in putting it on a steaming hot potato or other vegetable or cooking
with it; heating alters the fatty acid chains in its chemical bonds and actually
renders the flax oil harmful to the body. Also,
don’t consume whole flaxseeds because of other components in them that
interfere with the healing process.

Flaxseed oil assists the body to utilize vitamin A. During the first month of
following the Gerson Therapy, take 2 tablespoonfuls of flax oil per day. After
the first month and during the balance of treatment, limit your use of flax oil to
1 tablespoonful daily. Flax oil is best taken at lunch or dinner as part of the
salad dressing or on potatoes and vegetables.

BEE POLLEN AND ROYAL JELLY

There are two types of flower pollen: an exceedingly light kind sent
haphazardly on the winds and another heavier form delivered mechanically by
bees and other insects. Bee pollen, therefore, is the heavier, non- airborne
substance derived from the male seed of flowers known as entomoplule pollens,
which hitch a ride on honeybees who forage among flower blossoms.
Entomophile pollens depend solely on insect transport for spreading flowers’
fertilization. Because they are not airborne, the entomophile pollens in bee
pollen do not produce the widely disseminated pollen-induced allergies.

Bee pollen contains massive amounts of nutritional ingredients, including
ten amino acids, ten minerals, fifteen vitamins, ten nutraceuti- cals, antibiotics
potent against E. col: and proteus microbes, and human-growth-stimulating
substances. All over our planet, scientists and medical researchers praise the
mutritive properties of bee pollen.”

The Gerson Therapy incorporates bee pollen into its program, especially for
those patients coping with cancer. Then, 2 to 4 teaspoonfuls per day of bee
pollen are used at the point of treatment progress when proteins are
reintroduced into the patient's diet, starting from approximately the tenth or
twelfth week. Noncancer patients can begin taking bee pollen earlier, about the
sixth week. Despite bee pollen’s being a nonallergenic substance, some patients
may exhibit allergies to it, so the initial dosage should probably be as little as V2
teaspoonful per day.
148 THE GERSON THERAPY

Royal jelly is the rich substance fed to the queen bee for the whole of her life
and plays an essential role in the making of a queen. It is exceptionally rich in
hormones, twenty amino acids, sugars, acetylcholine, DNA, RNA, fatty acids,
gelatin, collagen, gamma globulin, antibiotics, and B vitamins, plus vitamins A,
C, and E.2

As an optional nutritional supplement that may be added to the
Gerson Therapy if desired, the recommended dosage of royal jelly is 100 mg in
capsules taken one hour before breakfast. Do not take royal jelly with hot food.

Vitamin B12 Injections and Crude Liver Extract

Required for proper digestion, absorption of foods, the synthesis of protein,
and the metabolism of carbohydrates and fats, vitamin Bj2 certainly is an
appropriate nutritional supplement for inclusion in the Gerson Therapy. It is
particularly effective for the treatment of anemia. Also, it aids in normal cell
formation and cellular longevity, prevents nerve damage, maintains fertility,
and promotes normal growth and development by maintaining the fatty
sheaths that cover and protect nerve endings.”

Vitamin B,. is administered by intramuscular injection into the gluteus
medius muscle, 0.1 cc (100 meg) once daily for four to six months or more. It is
accompanied simultaneously (in the same injection syringe) by 3 cc of crude liver
extract. Dr. Gerson found that such liver therapy brings about the restoration of
new red blood corpuscles (reticulocytes) and helps the body make the correct
use of amino acids. He found crude liver extract was indicated in intoxication
during pregnancy; tuberculosis of the lungs and other organs; arthritis
deformans in more advanced stages; mental diseases and bodily asthenias;
spastic conditions, especially angina pectoris; and malignancies.

Dr. Gerson reports that “leukemias and myelomas need greater doses of liver
juice [which is no longer available] and vitamin By». ... In the case of all of these
diseases, we have cause to assume the concomitant damage to the liver has
occurred as a result of permanent intoxication or functional disorders of the
neighboring organs.”24

VITAMIN C

Inasmuch as the Gerson diet contains large amounts of natural vitamin C, a
routine daily supplementation with this vitamin should not be necessary;
however, vitamin C is the prime nutrient when it comes to overall support of the
Nutritional Supplements on the Diet 149

immune system Vitamin C is used supplementally as a tool for fighting
infection, and as part of a pain-relieving triad of natural and nontoxic
medications. It also offsets free radical pathology created by the administration
of chemotherapy or radiation therapy.

The Gerson Therapy's dose of vitamin C comes in orally administered
crystalline (powdered) form such as Bronson’s Vitamin C in an amount of 1 to
1.5 grams per day. Never use calcium or sodium ascorbate, since these two
particular products will bring about serious detrimental effects. High doses of
intravenous vitamin C are associated with long-term survival in patients with a
variety of cancers, even after the tumors have metastasized.2”

CHROMIUM PICOLINATE

This supplement has been found to be helpful in overcoming age- onset and, to
some extent, also Juvenile Diabetes. It is also given to such patients.

CHARCOAL TABLETS

Used as a controlling mechanism for diarrhea, gas absorption in the intestinal
tract, and externally in clay poultices, charcoal tablets are made from 10 grains of
highly reamed wood charcoal. The number of tablets taken (dosages) is
variable depending on the extent of symptoms.

Ox BILE POWDER AND CASTILE SOAP

For purposes of emulsification, ox bile powder and castile soap are products
applied to mix one liquid into another, making a suspension of castor

oil. Thus, as described in chapter 13, ox bile powder and castile soap tend to
bring the castor oil enema into solution.

POLARIZING TREATMENT

Developed by the noted Mexico City cardiologist and researcher Demetrio
Sodi-Pallares, M.D., an intravenous solution known as GKI is infused
intravenously as an addition to the Gerson Therapy. GKI consists of 1 liter of 10
percent dextrose in water, 20 mEq of potassium chloride, and 15 units “lente”
insulin. Up to a maximum of 3 liters of GKI are administered to the patient
over twenty-four hours to bring about the reduction of intercellular edema,
increase cellular uptake of potassium, stimulate anaerobic and aerobic
150 THE GERSON THERAPY
glycolysis (particularly in the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation),
lower intercellular acidosis, and promote protein synthesis. It is a nontoxic but
potent analgesic. Polarizing treatment is a recent add-on to the Gerson Therapy
protocol.

GKI, the basic polarizing solution, is described in Merck’s Manual of Standard
Medical Procedures, a standard medical text. Dr. Sodi-Pallares reports that in
many patients who are deficient in potassium, it is necessary to provide GKI as
a transport mechanism to help potassium travel through the cell membrane. He
achieved this by using glucose (G), a potassium solution (K), and a small
amount of insulin (I), which are injected together intravenously. Polarizing
treatment promotes healing in the diseased heart and in tissues damaged by
cancer and other degenerative illnesses. Patients with edema do experience an
accelerated reabsorption and release of the tissue fluids that they have
accumulated.*° Since the Gerson Therapy provides ample potassium as well as
glucose in juices, one can use just 3 units of lente insulin in some patients to
produce the same result.

AMYGDALIN/LAETRILE

Laetrile, the purified form of amygdalin, which occurs naturally in apricot pits
and many other foods, was thought to cure cancer, but over time we have
learned that it does not do so by itself. Laetrile is a cyanogenic glycoside
(meaning that it contains cyanide), but it is nontoxic. It has been used by some
Gerson Therapy facilities as an analgesic for the relief of pain and for other
anticancer properties. While it is not a standard part of the Gerson Therapy
protocol, Gerson patients may request laetrile from their physician for use in
their treatment. It has come into more common use and is more effective when
applied with hyperthermia, hot tub baths, and hot fomentations.2”

References for Chapter Eleven

1. Petersdorf, R, et al, eds. Harzison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1983, pp. 614-623.
2. Mazzaferri, E.L. ‘Adult hypothyroidism.” Postgraduate Medicine. 79:64-
72, 1986.
3. Barnes, B.O.; Galton, L. Hypothyroidism The Unsuspected Illness. New
York: Thomas Crowell, 1976.
4. Langer, S.E; Scheer, J.F. Solved: The Riddle of Illness. New Canaan,
Conn.: Keats Publishing, 1984.
5. Dorland’s Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 28th ed. Philadelphia: WB.
Saunders Company, 1994, p. 1543.
152 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chapter Twelve

LIVER
DETOXIFICATION
WITH COFFEE
ENEMAS

KK Gardner, aged forty-six, a taxidermist living in Phoenix, Arizona,
discovered that he had only an 8 percent chance of five-year survival
because cancer of both the esophagus and larynx had struck him. Expanding in
Mr. Gardner's throat was a golf-ball-sized malignant tumor that imminently
endangered his life.

“I bought the Gerson Therapy book [A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases],
read it two times in less than twenty days, and decided, what do I have to lose?
I knew I was dying. The coffee enemas were a mental hurdle I had to overcome,
but once I experienced one of them, I could feel a difference in the boosting of
my health and realized their importance,’ Kent Gardner wrote for the Gerson
Healing Newsletter. (Mr. Gardner's photograph may be viewed on the facing
page).

“After about one and a half months, the swelling was way down, and the
tumor was dead,” he continues. “Reducing in size weekly, it was rotting in my
throat. Frankly, it felt like hell! This thing now rotting produced a constant,
horrible smell unlike anything I had ever experienced— even after working for
Liver Détoxifications with Coffee Enemas 153

twenty-four years as a taxidermist!

“Still doing the Gerson Therapy faithfully, about two and a half months
later, as I was locking my car to walk into a local hardware store, the dead
tumor fluttered [vibrated] for about two seconds, then as I swallowed I felt it
break free. I sort of staggered into the store, feeling panicked. I broke into
profuse sweating and started losing consciousness. I fell

wks

Kent Gardner

to my knees in a series of convulsions, and I knew I was in trouble,” Mr.
Gardner asserts.

“Thinking about this situation later, I realized the tumor had fallen into my
stomach, where it mixed with digestive juices, producing ammonia poisons and
gases. I should have tried to throw it up, but ego, and not being able to think
clearly, didn’t allow me to vomit publicly. To this day,’ admits Mr. Gardner, “I
don’t remember or know how I managed to make it back to my car and then
drive home, which was a twenty-minute ride. For the next five days I was
totally bedridden.

“T took three coffee enemas a day; my wife helped me, doing all that was
necessary. The tumor’s toxic effects were manifold—headaches, vomiting, bad
abdominal cramps, flulike aches and pains of the joints and muscles, fever,
sleeplessness, fast pulse, dry mouth, no appetite, constipation, and many other
troubles,” the taxidermist states. “I was in an awful state of absolute illness!

“But on the sixth day I felt better and was able to walk around. I have been
walking on water ever since. Because of that experience, I have done my
154 THE GERSON THERAPY

homework and am experientially educated far beyond my LQ., concerning the
human body and nutrition,” Kent Gardner says. “All living cells and organisms
on this planet need water, food, and air. It is the quality, not the quantity, that
determines perfect health, or disease. You can’t trash and pollute your body
and expect to have perfect health. What all of us need are daily coffee enemas,
something 1 do on a regular basis —cancer or not.”

ORIGINS OF COFFEE ENEMAS AS GERSON THERAPY

The much disputed, ridiculed, and controversial coffee enemas have an
unusual origin in becoming a primary component of the Gerson Therapy.

Certainly enemas are not new; they were transcribed as part of the Manual of
Discipline, recorded two thousand years ago, comprising one of the books in the
Dead Sea Scrolls. Also, The Essene Gospel of Peace, a third-century Aramaic
manuscript found in the secret archives of the Vatican, strongly advises about
the taking of enemas in the following manner:*:

“1 tell you truly, the angel of water shall cast out of your body all unclean-
nesses which defiled it without and within. And all unclean and evil smelling
things shall flow out of you, even as the uncleannesses of garments washed in
water flow away and are lost in the stream of the river. I tell you truly, holy is
the angel of water who cleanses all that is unclean and makes all evil-smelling
things of a sweet odor... .

Think not that it is sufficient that the angel of water embrace you outwards
only. I tell you truly, the uncleanness within is greater by much than the
uncleanness without. And he who cleanses himself without, but within
remains unclean, is like to tombs that outwards are painted fair, but are within
full of all manner of horrible uncleannesses and abominations. So 1 tell you
truly, suffer the angel of water to baptize you also within, that you may
become free from all your past sins, and that within likewise you may become
as pure as the river’s foam sporting in the sunlight. .. .

Seek, therefore, a large trailing gourd, having a stalk the length of a man;
take out its inwards and fill it with water from the river which the sun has
warmed. Hang it upon the branch of a tree, and kneel upon the ground
before the angel of water, and suffer the end of the stalk of the trailing gourd
to enter your hinder parts, that the water may flow through all your bowels.
Afterwards rest kneeling on the ground before the angel of water and pray
to the living God that he will forgive you all your past sins, and pray to the
angel of water that he will free your body from every uncleanness and
disease. Then let the water run out from your body, that it may carry away
from within it all the unclean and evil-smelling things of
Liver Détoxifications with Coffee Enemas 155

sins, and pray to the angel of water that he will free your body from every
uncleanness and disease. Then let the water run out from your body, that it
may carry away from within it all the unclean and evil-smelling things of
Satan. And you shall see with your eyes and smell with your nose all the
abominations and uncleannesses which defiled the temple of your body;
even all the sins which abode in your body, tormenting you with all
manner of pains. I tell you truly, baptism with water frees you from all of
these. Renew your baptizing with water on every day of your fast, till the
day when you see that the water which flows out of you is as pure as the
river's foam. Then betake your body to the coursing river, and therein the
arms of the angel of water render thanks to the living God that he has freed
you from your sins. And this holy baptizing by the angel of water is the
Rebirth unto the new life.”

So enemas have been used for general purposes of detoxification since
ancient times. However, the use of coffee to increase the effectiveness of
treatment and to reduce pain probably dates back only to the time of the First
World War. A Gerson Therapy exponent, Dr. Jerry Walters, tells the following
story about the original administrations of enemas containing the coffee
beverage:

During World War I, Germany was surrounded by the Allies’ military
forces, and many imported materials were short or missing for German
citizens. Among other things, morphine was running very low in supply.
Also there was hardly any coffee available to drink. Moreover, painkillers,
anesthetics, and other drugs were lacking too. When soldiers were sent
back from the front lines, severely wounded, and in need of surgery, there
usually was just a bit of anesthesia available — perhaps only enough to get
them through the surgical operation.

When the anesthesia wore off, obviously the pain set in for the wounded
soldier. In many cases, after the doctors finished operating, they ordered
plain water enemas for the patients. But the nurses were desperately looking
for something more to help the soldiers deal with their pain.

It happened that there was always coffee brewing, available only for the
surgeons to drink. They often had to work around the clock, and needed to
be kept awake by caffeine in the beverage. Sometimes, a little of their black
coffee was left over. Apparently, some nurse had the idea that, since the
coffee was doing the surgeons good, perhaps it would also help the soldiers.
So the nurses poured a quantity of the leftover coffee into the soldiers’ enema
buckets. The soldiers receiving coffee enemas reported that these were doing
them some good, and that their pain was much relieved.

These reports coming out of the First World War aroused the interest of two
156 THE GERSON THERAPY

researchers, Professor O. A. Meyer, M.D., and Professor Martin Heubner, M.D.,
at the German University of Goettingen’s College of Medicine. (Please see Dr.
Max Gerson’s lecture describing this occurrence, reproduced in its entirety in
Appendix II of A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases.) During the 1920s, these
two medical professors further examined the effect of caffeine when given
rectally to rats. They observed that the caffeinated enemas stimulated the
laboratory animals’ bile ducts to open, and the professors then published their
findings in the German medical literature.

For some time after learning of this research by Professors Meyer and
Heubner, Dr. Max Gerson used a combination of the two drugs, caffeine and
potassium citrate, in the form of drops that were added to the enema water. But
he found later that a solution simply made by boiling coffee grounds was more
effective and was much more easily available to everybody who wanted to take
coffee enemas. Thus, Dr. Gerson incorporated a program of detoxification using
coffee enemas into the Gerson Therapy, and the same procedure remains
today.?

THE BENEFICIAL ACTION OF A COFFEE ENEMA

Enemas made from drip-grind boiled coffee have proven themselves an
advantageous means of restoring the liver. The caffeine drug in coffee ad-
ministered as an enema definitely detoxifies the liver and is a primary
therapeutic approach of the Gerson Therapy. “This treatment should be
followed strictly, both in the clinic and later at home, for at least two years. . . .
The liver is the main organ for the regeneration of the body’s metabolism for the
transformation of food from intake to output,” writes Dr. Gerson.’

During a 1985 conference on cancer treatment conducted by the late
alternative treatment cancer specialist Harold Manner, Ph.D., held at King of
Prussia, Pennsylvania, Dr. Manner discussed the internal workings of a coffee
enema. He announced to the audience that he learned about these physiological
actions from Dr. Max Gerson, who had expounded on the subject in the same
way at least thirty years before. He gave Dr. Gerson full credit for developing
this liver detoxification technique for the treatment of cancer. The next few
paragraphs are paraphrased from Dr.

Manners description of the body's cleansing mechanism that occurs when the
coffee enema is administered.

While the coffee enema is being retained in the gut (for an optimum period
ranging from twelve to fifteen minutes), all of the body's blood passes through
the liver every three minutes. The hemorrhoidal blood vessels dilate from
exposure to the caffeine; in turn, the liver’s portal veins dilate too.
Liver Détoxifications with Coffee Enemas 157

Simultaneously, the bile ducts expand with blood, the bile flow increases, and
the smooth muscles of these internal organs relax. The blood serum and its
many components are detoxified as this vital fluid passes through the
individual's caffeinated liver. The quart of water being retained in the bowel
stimulates the visceral nervous system, promoting peristalsis. The water
delivered through the bowel dilutes the bile and causes an even greater increase
in bile flow. There is a flushing of toxic bile which is further affected by the
body’s enzymatic catalyst known to physiologists as glutathione S-transferase
(GST).

The GST is increased in quantity in the small bowel by 700 percent, which is
an excellent physiological effect, because this enzyme quenches free radicals.
These quenched radicals leave the liver and gallbladder as bile salts flowing
through the duodenum. The bile salts are carried away by peristalsis in the gut,
traveling from the small intestine, through the colon, and out the rectum.

In 1990, the Austrian surgeon Peter Lechner, M_D., and his colleagues, who
had been investigating Dr. Gerson’s cancer treatment, discussed the benefits of
increasing quantities of GST in the gut. It was then that Dr. Lechner reported:4

* GST binds bilirubin and its glucuronides so that they can be eliminated
from the hepatocytes (liver cells).

¢ GST blocks and detoxifies carcinogens, which require oxidation or
reduction to be activated. Its catalytic function produces a protective
effect against many chemical carcinogens.

* GST forms a covalent bond with nearly all highly electrophilic (free
radical) substances, which is the precondition of their elimination from
the body. The intermediate products of potential liver poisons (hepatotoxic
cytostatics) also belong in this category of forming free radical pathology.

Before the above published finding, Dr. Lechner had decided in 1984 that the
coffee enema had a very specific purpose: lowering serum toxins. His medical
report states, “Coffee enemas have a definite effect on the colon which can be
observed with an endoscope. Wattenberg and coworkers were able to prove in
1981 that the palmitic acid found in coffee promotes the activity of glutathione
S-transferase and other ligands by manyfold times above the normal. It is this
enzyme group which is responsible primarily for the conjugation of free
electrophile radicals which the gall bladder will then release.”>

Starting in the late 1970s, the laboratory owned and supervised by bio-
chemist Lee W Wattenberg, Ph.D., identified two salts of palmitic acid, cafestol
palmitate and kahweol palmitate (both present in coffee), as the potent
intensifiers of glutathione S-transferase. Such enhancement turns this enzyme
into a major detoxification system that catalyzes the binding of a vast variety of
158 THE GERSON THERAPY

electron acceptors (the electrophiles) from the bloodstream to the sulfhydryl
group of glutathione. Because the reactive ultimate carcinogenic forms of
chemicals are electrophiles, the glutathione S-transferase system becomes an
important mechanism for cleaning away any existing cancer cells (carcinogenic
detoxification).

This detoxifying of cancer cells has been demonstrated innumerable times by
experiments on laboratory mice wherein detoxification of the liver increases by
600 percent and the small bowel detoxifies by 700 percent when coffee beans are
added to the animals’ diet. Analogous results take place within humans who
are giving themselves coffee enemas.°2011

COFFEE ENEMAS CAUSE EXCRETION OF CANCER BREAKDOWN

PRODUCTS

The coffee enema has a very specific purpose in the treatment and reversal of
degenerative diseases. As stated by Dr. Peter Lechner, it lowers the quantity of
blood serum toxins, literally cleaning the poisons out of fluids nourishing
normal cells. Invariably, some small quantities of poisons are contained therein.
Each cell is challenged by toxins, oxygen starvation, malnutrition, or trauma
which collectively alter the cell’s molecular configuration and cause it to lose its
preference for potassium. As explained in chapters 10 and 11, sodium competes
with potassium for association sites in damaged cells.

Loss of cellular potassium and increase of cellular sodium results in de-
creased electron flow through the damaged cell, which some biochemists refer
to as a macromolecule. This injured macromolecule becomes unattractive to
paramagnetic ions and a subsequent disorganization of water
molecules may take place. Because bulk-phase water, structured in a high-
energy state, is the main mechanism controlling cellular water content and
purity, any disturbance in water structuring will result in the cell’s swelling
with excess water and extracellular solutes. When the internal environment of
the macromolecule becomes polluted with excess water and extracellular
materials, mitochondrial production of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) is greatly
impaired. The result is that macromolecules cannot produce sufficient energy to
repair themselves unless the challenge is removed.

Endogenous serum toxins can be generated within macromolecules by
bacteria and by malignant cells. It’s been observed that surrounding almost any
active malignancies are spheres of damaged normal tissue in which water
structuring is impaired by the chronic insult of tumor toxins. Energy production
and immunity are depressed in these macromolecules, which are swollen with
excess salt and water. Such damaged tissue possesses a decreased blood
Liver Détoxifications with Coffee Enemas 159

circulation because oversized edematous cells crowd together inside the
capillaries, arterioles, and lymph ducts.12

Teaching that improved blood circulation and tissue integrity would prevent
the spread and cause the destruction of malignancies, Max Gerson, M_D., held it
as axiomatic that no cancer could exist in the presence of normal metabolism.
Dr. Gerson’s favorite example of this fact was that the tissues of healthy
laboratory animals receiving transplanted malignant tumors quickly kill these
tumors by the process of inflammation which arises in the healthy animal hosts.
They defend themselves against such foreign proteins. In order to cause
transplanted malignant cells to “take” in the experimental animals, laboratory
technicians must first damage the animals’ thyroid and adrenal glands. Of
course, Dr. Gerson’s efforts were directed toward healing and normality. His
desire was to create a near-normal metabolism in tissues surrounding his
patients’ existing malignant tumors.

Enzyme systems in the liver and small bowel are responsible for conversion
and neutralization of the four most common tissue toxins, polyamines,
ammonia, toxic-bound nitrogen, and electrophiles, all of which can cause cell
and membrane damage. Such protective liver and gut enzyme systems are
massively increased in their beneficial effects by coffee enemas. Twenty years
after his death, editors at the highly scientific journal Physiological Chenustry and
Physics complimented Dr. Gerson by reprinting one of his works. They
affirmed, “Caffeine enemas cause dilation of bile ducts, which facilitates
excretion of toxic cancer breakdown
products by the liver and dialysis of toxic products from blood across the
colonic wall.”

PAIN RELIEF RESULTS FROM TAKING COFFEE ENEMAS

Prior to the reported findings of both Dr. Lee W Wattenberg and Dr. Peter
Lechner, medical journalist Mark F. McCarty, in 1981, wrote in the journal
Medical Hypotheses4 “At the Senate Select Subcommittee hearing on cancer
research in 1946,15 five independent medical doctors who had had personal
experience with patients treated by Dr. Gerson, submitted letters indicating that
they had been surprised and encouraged by the results they had seen, and
urged a widespread trial of the method including taking coffee enemas. One of
these doctors claimed that ‘relief of severe pain was achieved in about 90
percent of cases’.”

Observations so recorded back in 1946 were the truth then and remain
correct today in the same way. While the use of coffee as an enema often evokes
astonishment and mirth in persons who don’t use enemas as well as in those
160 THE GERSON THERAPY

who emphatically prefer to drink their coffee at the nearby Starbucks™
beverage shop, these same people would benefit immensely from receiving
coffee through the rectum They could get rid of their pain and other
discomforts, whatever the source, by accepting the value of this detoxification
method. From the patient's point of view, no matter which degenerative disease
is causing symptoms, the coffee enema means relief from confusion, general
nervous tension, depression, many allergy-related symptoms, and, most
importantly, from severe pain.!°

COFFEE ENEMAS STIMULATE BILE FLOW

The coffee enema is in a class by itself as a therapeutic agent. In no way does
the oral administration of beverage coffee have the same effect as its rectal
administration. On the contrary, drinking coffee virtually ensures reabsorption
of toxic bile. While other agents classed as stimulators of bile flow (choleretics)
do increase bile production from the liver, they hardly enhance any detoxifying
by that organ’s enzyme systems. Choleretics do nothing to ensure the passage
of bile from the intestines out the rectum It’s a physiological fact that bile is
normally reabsorbed up to ten times by the body before working its way out of
the intestines in feces.

The enzyme-intensifying ability of the coffee enema is unique among
choleretics. Because it does not allow reabsorption of toxic bile by the liver
across the gut wall, it is an entirely effective means of detoxifying the
bloodstream through existing enzyme systems in both the liver and the small
intestine. Inasmuch as clinical practice has taught clinicians utilizing the Gerson
Therapy that coffee enemas are well tolerated by patients when used as
frequently as every four hours in a twenty-four-hour period, the coffee enema
should be categorized in the medical literature as the only non reabsorbed,
effective, repeatable choleretic agent. Such a classification could go far to bring
about the healing of pathologies that require quick absorption and no reuse of
bile.

SUMMARIZING THE PHYSIOLOGICAL BENEFITS OF COFFEE

ENEMAS
Dr. Gerson hypothesized on the physiological actions and effects of coffee
enemas and observed their clinical benefits.
Introducing a quart of boiled coffee solution into the colon will accomplish
the following physiological benefits:
Liver Détoxifications with Coffee Enemas 161

* It dilutes portal blood and, subsequently, the bile.

¢ Theophylline and theobromine, major nutraceutical constituents of coffee,
dilate blood vessels and counter inflammation of the gut.

¢ The palmitates of coffee enhance glutathione S-transferase, which is
responsible for the removal of many toxic radicals from blood serum.

¢ The fluid of the enema itself stimulates the visceral nervous system,
promoting peristalsis and the transit of diluted toxic bile from the
duodenum out the rectum.

¢ Because the stimulating enema is retained for up to fifteen minutes, and
because all the blood in the body passes through the liver nearly every
three minutes, coffee enemas represent a form of dialysis of blood across
the gut wall.

Coffee enemas are safe when used within the context of the combined
regime of the Gerson Therapy. Dr. Gerson’s stated intention in supplying a
sodium-restricted, high-potassium, high-micronutrient diet of fruits, vegetables,
and whole grains was to supply all nutrients, known and unknown, which are
necessary for cell respiration and energy production. High-potassium, low-
sodium environments tend to return cell macromolecules to normal
configuration states and to improve water structuring and water content. The
addition by Dr. Gerson of supplemental potassium salts as acetate, gluconate,
and phosphate (monobasic) to the diet, in which malate is supplied by frequent
use of apples, improves the efficiency of the tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle in
mitochondrial energy production. The Krebs cycle is a series of enzyme
reactions in which the body uses carbohydrates, proteins, and fats to yield
carbon dioxide, water, and energy for organ functions.

Animal protein restriction, employed by Dr. Gerson as a temporary aspect of
treatment for his degenerative disease patients, was observed even in the late
nineteenth century to aid in the reduction of cellular edema. Administration of
high loading doses of thyroid hormone and Lugol's solution result in
multiplication of mitochondria, which have their own DNA and RNA and
replicate independently of the cell. Thyroid is known to improve cell oxidation
of sugars and therefore ATP production so that cell energy is markedly
increased.

These numerous treatment mechanisms, including coffee enemas, proposed
by Dr. Max Gerson achieve the following. They:

* Reduce blood serum toxins to eliminate chronic challenge to damaged
normal cells (macromolecules),

¢ Improve cell potassium ion content,

* Reduce cell sodium content,
162 THE GERSON THERAPY

* Reduce cell swelling through improved water structuring,
¢ Increase cell mitochondria count and activity, and
* Supply micronutrients necessary for cell energy production and repair.

For a person attempting to cope with any form of chronic or acute illness
occurring from some degenerative process, the contribution of low blood serum
toxin levels by the regular administration of coffee enemas is basic to achieving
increased cell energy production, enhanced tissue integrity, improved blood
circulation, boosted immunity, better tissue repair, and cellular regeneration.
All of these beneficial physiological effects have been observed clinically to
result from the administration of the combined regime of the Gerson healing
program. Unquestionably, taking coffee enemas is among the most vital aspects

of the Gerson Therapy.
References for Chapter Twelve

1. Szekely, EB. The Essene Gospel of Peace. London: International Biogenic
Society, 1981, pp. 15, 16.

2. Gerson, M. “The cure of advanced cancer by diet therapy: a summary of
30 years of clinical experimentation.” Appendix II in A Cancer Therapy: Results of
Fifty Cases, 6th ed. Bonita, Calif: The Gerson Institute, 1999, pp. 407,408.

3. Ibid, p. 247.

4. Lechner, R; Kronberger, I. “Erfahrungen mit dem Einsatz der Diat-
Therapie in der chirurgischen Onkologie.” Aktuel Erndhrungmedizin. 2(15) :72—
78, 1990.

5. Lechner, F “Dietary regime to be used in oncological postoperative
care.” Proceedings of the Oesterreicher Gesellschaft filr Clururgie. June 21-23, 1984.

6. Chasseaud, L.F. “The role of glutathione S-transferase in the metabolism
of chemical carcinogens and other electrophilic agents.” Advanced Cancer
Research. 29:175-274, 1979.

7. Jakoby, W.B. “A group of multifunctional detoxification proteins.”
Advanced Enzymology and Related Areas of Molecular Biology. 46:383-414, 1978.

8. Spamins, V.L.; Wattenberg, L,.W. “Enhancement of glutathione S-
transferase activity of the mouse forestomach by inhibitors of benzo[a]pyrene-
induced neoplasia of forestomach.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute.
66:769-771, 1981.

9. Spamins, V.L. “Effects of dietary constituents on (G-S-T) glutathione S-
transferase activity.” Proceedings of the American Association of Cancer Researchers
and the American Society of Clinical Oncologists. 21:80, Abstract 319, 1980.

10.Sparnins, V.L.; Lam, L.K-T.; Wattenberg, L.W. “Effects of coffee on
glutathione S-transferase (G-S-T) activity and 7-12-dimethylbenz(a)an- thracene
(DMBA)-induced neoplasia.” Proceedings of the American Association of Cancer
Researchers and the American Soctety of Clinical Oncologists. 22:114, Abstract 453,
1981.
164 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chapter Thirteen

COFFEE ENEMAS
AND HOW TO TAKE
THEM

B roadly known almost as a hallmark of the Gerson Therapy, the technique
of giving or receiving coffee enemas for program participants has reaped
its share of denigration. Numbers of critics, general detractors, and outright
slanderers have condemned the practice; yet rectal self injection with a quart of
liquid containing coffee beverage is therapeutic and healing.

Exemplifying disparagement of coffee enemas was the editor of the journal of
the American Medical Association, Morris Fishbein, M.D. Now deceased, Dr.
Fishbein was an avowed enemy of Max Gerson, M_D. and anything to do with
his treatment program Publicly and privately, in speaking of alternative
methods of healing, then known as “unconventional cancer therapies,’ Dr.
Fishbein used to repeatedly offer the tired joke: “How do you want your coffee
enema, with cream or sugar?”

ADDRESSING THE TOPIC OF COFFEE ENEMAS
But even with a supposed medical oddity relating to its coffee enemas, the
Gerson Therapy has won worldwide respectability. For instance, in a letter
Coffee Enemas and IIlow to Take Them 165

dated March 8, 1999, the Earl Baldwin of Bewdley, a member of the House of
Lords in England, invited Charlotte Gerson to address members of the English
Parliament about the Gerson Therapy. Peers and MPs attended her presentation
before the Parliamentary Group for Alternative and Complementary Medicine
on May 19, 1999, and her lecture was a great success.

Furthermore, Dr. Gerson’s daughter accepts invitations to address medical
school classes as well, and there are many from which to choose. It is difficult to
describe the incredulous facial expressions which ripple across the audience of
medical students when the topic of coffee enemas is introduced. Embarrassed
sniggering invariably may be heard from several seats in the lecture hall. And
then a wise guy student will be heard to heckle aloud, “How do you take your
coffee?” Snatching a page from Dr. Fishbein’s book, Charlotte Gerson doesn’t
miss a beat when she swiftly answers: “Black — without cream and sugar.”
Laughter relaxes the entire classroom and Charlotte goes on to explain this
detoxifying aspect of her famous father’s treatment program.

Responses from the audience of budding doctors will typically be: “Boy, I'll
bet you get a buzz out of that!” Or, “Couldn’t you just drink three or four cups
of coffee?” Or, “Why go to all that trouble just for a caffeine high?’ And
eventually, the most significant question gets asked from active student
thinkers whose medical interests are piqued, “What does a coffee enema do?”

Since the full answer was given in our prior chapter, you know the correct
response already. If not, please return to read chapter 12.

DR. GERSON SUMMARIZES THE COFFEE ENEMA PROCEDURE

In a succinct manner, Dr. Max Gerson summarized the best procedure for
self- administration of a coffee enema. He had written down the simple steps in
abbreviated form for easy following. Those directions were recorded in his
famous text for the medical consumer, and the Gerson Institute has carried
forward with refinements to his method as described in its volume of
educational literature.

Dr. Gerson suggests that the individual assume a specific body position
when taking a coffee enema. He writes: “To make enemas most effective, the
patient should lie on his right side, with both legs drawn close to the abdomen,
and breathe deeply, in order to suck the greatest amount of
fluid into all parts of the colon. The fluid should be retained ten to fifteen
minutes.”

As was described by now-deceased Harold Manner, Ph.D., in chapter 12,
within twelve minutes nearly all the caffeine from the coffee is absorbed
through the bowel wall and into the hemorrhoidal veins. From these blood
166 THE GERSON THERAPY

vessels it flows directly into the portal veins and then into the liver. Dr. Gerson
advises for cancer patients and other very sick people that during the first
months of treatment, enemas may be taken as frequently as every four hours,
day and night, for their optimal effect. Some terminal cancer patients save their
lives and restore health by taking five coffee enemas each day for months at a
time.1

In his writings, the formulation that the much-respected German- American
physician had offered as the best coffee enema concentration is the following:

1. Drop 3 rounded tablespoonfuls of ground (drip) coffee (not instant)
into one quart of water.

2. Let the solution boil three minutes and then simmer fifteen minutes
more.

3. Strain the solution.

4. Filla quart glass container with the liquid and let cool to body
temperature.

5. Use this solution at body temperature for purposes of bowel infusion.

The daily amount of coffee liquid can be prepared at one time, or a more
concentrated coffee solution may be made and then diluted down to the
required strength for repeated separate enemas during consecutive
applications.

COFFEE ENEMA IMPROVEMENTS OVER HALF A CENTURY

Detoxification of the body is one of the most important life- enhancement
contributions of the Gerson Therapy. The coffee enema is the basic procedure
employed; but since the colon is a highly absorptive organ, enemas can be
applied for various reasons. As you learned in the
last chapter, enemas go back to the ancients, and are described in literature
through the ages.

During the past half century or more since Dr. Gerson first instituted coffee
enemas as part of his treatment program, many improvements have been
added as refinements to the actual enema procedure. This section will describe
some of those new methods that the Gerson Institute has incorporated.

Self-administration of the regular coffee enema has been modified slightly
and is now made as follows:

1. Take three rounded tablespoonfuls of drip-grind coffee and add them
to a quart of boiling water (use distilled water if your drinking water is
Coffee Enemas and IIlow to Take Them 167

furnished from a fluoridated water source; use filtered water if you
reside in an average drinking water area).

2. Let the mixture boil for three minutes uncovered and allow it to
simmer for another fifteen minutes more covered.

3. Strain the solution through a fine strainer to catch floating coffee
grounds. Or employ a coarser strainer lined with a filter cloth, such as
an old, used piece of white sheeting or a piece cut from a knit
undershirt. Add enough hot water to refill a glass container up to the 1-
quart level. (Some water will have been lost in boiling and straining.)

4. Prepare yourself to instill this coffee solution into the rectum when it
cools to body temperature.

PROCEDURE FOR INSTILLING THE COFFEE ENEMA

The patient should lie either on the padded floor (use a cushioning mat) or
on a mattress protected with a plastic sheet, either setup covered for comfort
with a towel. Rather than the floor or a bed, some patients use a camp bed or
the famous enema bench. This enema bench is made up of a table, about the
size of a 4-foot-by-2-foot cocktail table, covered with a 3- to 4-inch-thick layer of
foam rubber, which, in turn, is covered with some Naugahyde or plastic for
easy cleaning.

In fact, if you are able to get up and down easily, most often a clean
bathroom floor works best for giving yourself an enema. If that is the case, you
may prefer to put some soft padding on the bathroom floor, cover it with
plastic and a towel (a lawn chaise pad is excellent), plop down a pillow, and he
down on that padded floor. Be sure, in any case, that you or the patient you're
assisting are comfortable and warm.

The patient should lie on his or her right side, with legs pulled up in a
relaxed position. If, due to pain, the patient is unable to lie on the right side, it is
acceptable to lie on one’s back, also with legs pulled up. Lie on the left side only
as a last resort because the coffee enema goes deeper into the bowel most
effectively from the right side. Take your time letting gravity force the fluid
into your rectum and bowel. Have the bottom of an enema bag or bucket
elevated only about 18 inches above the tube’s end that is penetrating one’s
anus.

The enema once fully infused into the colon should, ideally, be held for from
twelve to fifteen minutes. By that time, almost all the available caffeine has
been absorbed. It is not suggested to hold it longer than fifteen minutes, since
the liquid will also be absorbed into the system If a person cannot hold the
168 THE GERSON THERAPY

enema for twelve minutes, he or she should do the best they can without trying
desperately to retain the fluid, which could bring on abdominal cramping. If
she or he can only manage say six to nine minutes, do release the liquid at that
shorter interval. Eventually, holding the coffee enema inside the bowel for
twelve minutes does become quite comfortable. It merely takes practice, and
some people have taken three or four months before achieving the ideal time
period.

A COFFEE ENEMA FOR THE BEDFAST PATIENT

Occasionally, a patient is bedfast and cannot get up for an enema or go to
the bathroom. In that case, assistance from a support person is required. Then,
proceed as we have described above:

1. Cover the mattress and bed clothing with plastic and a towel.
2. Have the patient take the enema while lying in bed.

3. Hold the quart of fluid if possible for from twelve to fifteen minutes,
and provide the patient with a bedpan.

4. If incontinence is a complication, the enema has to be introduced while
the patient is lying on the bedpan.

As we've mentioned —and it’s an important point—the enema bucket or bag
should not be more than 18 inches (50 cm) above the body so the
coffee does not flow into the bowel under too much pressure. The reason for
this becomes all too apparent rather quickly. An excessive height could cause
excessive pressure and easily set up counter peristalsis with cramping.

If cramping occurs, stop the flow of liquid, either by pinching the tube
closed or by lowering the bucket or bag to the level of the body for a little
while. Then resume the enema’s flow.

A number of patients, at the start of the treatment, have reported ex-
periencing difficulty getting a full quart of liquid into the colon. If that becomes
the situation for you or your loved one, start with whatever amount is most
comfortably received. Let the patient take and hold that lesser amount; expel it,
and then accept the rest of the enema.

Some people are able to take a full quart of coffee solution from the start, but
at the time of going through their first healing reaction, they can’t even take
half that amount. This may come from toxic pressure produced by the liver. It
requires the same sort of procedure as just described: take as much liquid as is
comfortable to hold; expel it, and then take the rest.
Coffee Enemas and IIlow to Take Them 169

VARIATIONS TO THE COFFEE ENEMA SOLUTION

There are many variations to the coffee enema. Some patients, if suffering
from an irritated bowel, colitis, diarrhea, bleeding, or cramping, may find it
more comfortable to use half a quart of the regular coffee and add half a quart
of chamomile tea. This combination is soothing to the intestinal tract and
usually helps to clear the above symptoms.

In case of serious diarrhea, it may be necessary to eliminate the coffee and
use only chamomile tea. Usually, as symptoms clear away, some coffee
concentrate can slowly be added to the herb tea, starting with 2 to 4 ounces,
then 6 to 8 ounces (always maintaining the quart quantity as the ideal
measurement), until the patient can again handle the full coffee enema.

Chamomile tea rather than coffee is also useful at the start of the Gerson
Therapy. During that time, when patients are required to receive five coffee
enemas a day, the last one at 10:00 P.M. may tend to keep them awake. In that
case, we recommend that such individuals replace the last coffee enema with
chamomile tea. Usually, in three to four days, the 10:00 P.M. coffee enema no
longer causes loss of sleep.
Coffee Enemas and How to Take Them 170

In a few special cases (during severe reactions, in heavy tumor absorption,
or in case of pain striking during the night), Dr. Gerson also suggested a
nighttime enema. If the patient cannot sleep because of pain or discomfort, it's
better for the patient to get up and out of bed at 2:00 or 3:00 A.M. to take a coffee
enema rather than to toss and turn and not sleep anyway. Instillation of that
coffee enema often allows the individual to go back to sleep. It may be
surprising to some, but these middle-of-the-night enemas never seem to keep
the patient awake.

Very-early-morning enemas are also extremely important for drug addicts
who wake up with nightmares due to toxicity or from withdrawal symptoms.
Here is a tip learned recently: before taking the nighttime or first morning
enema, it is wise to eat a piece of fruit or have some applesauce or fruit salad
(placed on the night table by the patient's bedside) to raise the blood sugar a
little.

More EXPLICIT INFORMATION ON THE CASTOR OIL

TREATMENT
Besides self-administering the coffee enema, another important feature of
detoxification is the castor oil procedure. To accomplish an exceedingly
intensive cleansing technique, Dr. Gerson prescribed a castor oil treatment for
the cancer patient to be conducted every other day. (This castor oil procedure
does not apply to cancer patients who were previously treated with cytotoxic or
other chemotherapy drugs. They should not take castor oil.)
Here is how a candidate should proceed with the castor oil treatment:
c. Take a cake of regular soap (not detergent) into your hand and rub it
for a few moments into a regular coffee enema at body temperature.
dad Take this soapy coffee and mix it into the castor oil with ox bile powder,
stirring constantly. (Some people find it best to use an electric mixer.)

When mixed, the castor oil still tends to rise to the top; therefore, you need
to stir constantly while you allow it to flow into your rectum (quite a trick; if
you can’t manage it, have somebody do the stirring for you as you take the
mixture). This enema along with the castor oil by mouth is virtually impossible
to hold. Do not work too hard at holding the mixture. Rather, release when
necessary.

Some patients report that when they release the castor oil enema, it burns
the anus. Burning can occur, but the circumstance to remember is that castor oil
does not burn. Instead it’s the release of highly toxic material coming out of the
Coffee Enemas and IIlow to Take Them a7.

body’s tissues that burns! This is one more indication of how important it is to
take these castor oil enemas. Indeed, after two or three castor oil treatments, the
burning is reduced and disappears. Such a disappearance indicates that the
toxic level in the system is lower and no longer irritates the rectum and anus. If
irritation exists, use a little petroleum jelly to soothe the area. You may also use
a little zinc oxide ointment (not suppositories, which contain painkillers).

A number of patients, if they previously suffered from hemorrhoids, have a
flare-up of this situation. It can be uncomfortable for a few days; but the patient
should definitely not stop the enemas. Zinc oxide ointment may be applied
locally. But please keep in mind that hemorrhoids are usually caused by toxic
pressure; therefore, detoxifying is extra- important, and stopping the enemas is
entirely wrong. It has also been observed in those patients that the hemorrhoids
shortly disappear and do not recur. It just takes a little waiting time and
patience.

PHYSICAL FLARE-UPS FROM THE ENEMA TREATMENTS

The frequency of taking coffee enemas as well as castor oil treatments is
reduced after a period of time. Some patients are so toxic that reduction of
enema frequencies do not apply to them If they reduce the detoxification too
soon and then feel ill, toxic, or headachy, they should go back to the more
intensive level for a period of time. Later, they can try to reduce the frequency
again. Each patient needs to adjust the frequency of detoxifying to his own
needs. At times, when the patient does well upon receiving less-frequent
enemas, flare-ups still could occur. These may include new toxic releases,
increased swellings or pain, headaches, or lack of appetite. At such times, an
extra coffee enema or a castor oil treatment has been known to work wonders.

Occasionally, flare-ups are accompanied by diarrhea. At such times, the
patient should only take perhaps two chamomile tea enemas daily to gently
cleanse the colon. When the diarrhea lets up, the patient could instill one
chamomile tea enema, followed four to six hours later with one coffee enema,
and another one of chamomile tea at night. When the colon is calmed, the
regular schedule may be resumed, but some of the coffee enemas can still be
mixed with chamomile tea.

Some flare-ups are extremely intensive and cause a great deal of bile to be
released by the liver. This bile could flow over into the stomach. Bile is highly
alkaline, but the stomach cannot hold anything that is not maintained in an acid
medium. The alkaline bile will therefore bring on immediate severe nausea,
almost always accompanied by vomiting. At such times, the patient should
172 THE GERSON THERAPY

omit the coffee enemas, since they simply stimulate more bile flow and more
vomiting! Drink a lot of peppermint tea and eat oatmeal gruel Use only
chamomile tea enemas. When the flare- up is overcome and nausea or vomiting
has stopped completely, then resume the coffee enemas.

Some patients have problems with a great deal of gas. When there is much
pressure from gas, it is difficult to infuse the coffee. At such times, it will
probably be necessary to lower the bucket to the patient's body height while
prone or even below the patient’s body (if he is in bed or on a bench) to allow
the fluid to flow back into the bucket while also allowing the gas to bubble out
of the rectum. However, if the gas is too high up in the intestinal tract, this
approach will not work.

In A Cancer Therapy (chapter 27, p. 201), Dr. Gerson discusses some of the
problems of flare-ups, including difficulties with the coffee enemas. We already
mentioned (see above) that during these unpleasant flaring reactions, patients
occasionally have a problem with infusing the enema although previously this
procedure went smoothly. The other problem which occurs is that the patient
takes an enema, holds it for the optimum twelve minutes, and then goes to
release it. But the infused fluid won't release! Such an uncooperative bowel
comes from intestinal spasming or cramping, which may not necessarily be
accompanied by pain or discomfort. There are several actions the patient can
take for a spasming colon:

1. Lie down on the bed, on the right side, legs pulled up, possibly with a
warm water bottle on the abdomen.

2. Don’t panic.

3. If after a little while, the coffee still cannot be released, take another
coffee enema, adding 3 tsp of a3 percent solution of hydrogen peroxide
to the solution.

4. If the spasm still won't release, take castor oil by mouth.

5. For the next few days, put 3 or 4 tsp of the regular potassium com-
pound into each coffee enema. Do not continue the potassium in the enema
for more than a week; otherwise, the colon becomes irritated.

During the course of this bowel spasming, at no time is there any danger to
the patient even if she or he is not able to release the coffee. The entire enema
solution is easily absorbed through the colon and excreted through the kidneys
and urine if it is not normally released.

There are still other ways to use the Gerson technique of enema therapy.
These are not really cleansing enemas, but rather rectal implants. In a few cases,
patients during a healing reaction vomit almost everything they take in. They
Coffee Enemas and IIlow to Take Them 173)

become dehydrated and hypoglycemic. At such times, it is easy to warm the
regular carrot or green juices (including the medications) to body temperature
and put the 8 ounces of juice into the bucket or bag and let it run into the
rectum. (Use only carrot/apple and green juices, not orange juice. Do not add
water to the juice.) This implant should not be expelled. Consisting of only 8
ounces, it can easily be held until it is fully absorbed. And instilling with a juice
enema may be repeated every hour as the juices are ready. As soon as the
patient is able, he or she should start to drink the juices again normally.

Somewhat in the same area, Dr. Gerson also suggested in cases of severe
ulcerations of the uterus or cervix to use a douche made up of green juice. This
is gently cleansing as well as detoxifying, and the procedure stimulates healing.

Dr. Gerson suggested that enough coffee for a full day’s needs can be
prepared at one time. In that case, you can prepare a concentrated coffee
solution.
How To Make Coffee Concentrate

To concentrate coffee for later use as a dilution, use a fairly large pot and
perhaps 2% to 3 quarts of water. Here is how to make coffee concentrate:

1. When the water boils, add 15 rounded tbsp of organic drip-grind coffee.
Since each enema should contain the equivalent of 3 tbsp of coffee,
using 15 tbsp will give you enough coffee concentrate for five enemas.

2. Bring the solution back to a boil for a few minutes, then let it simmer for
about fifteen minutes and then strain.

3. Divide the resulting concentrate into five equal portions. (You can put
equal amounts into five equal 1-quart glass bottles.)

Then fill the bottle to the full quart with distilled water for use.

5. If you need to modify the coffee enema with chamomile tea as we have
already explained, you can add a pint of tea to the coffee concentrate.

6. Finally, fill up the container with enough water to make a full quart.
Before using this mixture, heat it to body temperature.

Reference for Chapter Thirteen

1. Gerson, M. A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases and The Cure of
Advanced Cancer by Diet Therapy, 6th ed. Bonita, Calif: The Gerson Institute,
1999, p. 190.
Part Three

ADAPTING THE THERAPY
FOR VARIOUS DISEASES
Chapter Fourteen

STANDARD GERSON
THERAPY FOR MOST
CANCERS

L n 1984, Alexandra Lennox of Sacramento, California, aged forty-four,
divorced and raising three teenagers, was rediagnosed with invasive, in-
traductal carcinoma of the right breast after a previous lumpectomy. The patient's
initial diagnosis leading to the initial lumpectomy had been simpler and less
dangerous than it was this second time.

Immediately following her repeat operation for lump removal, the breast
surgeon saw that the margins in her cancerous breast tissues were not “clean,”
meaning that the lumpectomy had not cut away all the cancer. The surgeon
therefore suggested that her lymph nodes needed to be examined and proposed
to remove her right breast altogether (mastectomy) .

Aclose friend of Mrs. Lennox was able to secure an appointment for her with
the chief of the oncology department at Stanford University School of Medicine.
After his examination, the oncologist stated in an unemotional and factual
manner, “Undoubtedly this condition of yours is a typical two- to ten-year illness.
But I don’t think that you'll be alive in two years because the disease is so
extensive. Get your affairs in order and have the best time you can. And don’t
worry; we have powerful medications for you when your pain begins.”

The doctor’s devastating statement about the potential end of her life was not
easy to take, for Mrs. Lennox had been facing numerous complications simply
living each day. Prior to her diagnosis, for instance, she had been suffering from
severe depression, chronic low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), severe constant
headaches, black floaters in her eyes that disrupted vision, innumerable allergies,
candidiasis (numerous symptoms related to the yeast syndrome), kidney stones,
and a great deal of emotional upset—mainly anger after her divorce from an
THE GERSON THERAPY

alcoholic husband following seventeen years of marriage. And she worried about
her three teenage children who were using alcohol and drugs — seemingly learned
by association with her ex-husband. Unquestionably, there was tremendous men-
tal and emotional stress for this unfortunate woman.

After the breast reexamination and confirmed cancer diagnosis she made an
appointment with another specialist, a radiation oncologist. While sitting in his
office, she was repelled by being in the company of so many weak, bandaged,
severely sick patients who had been pushed along and were waiting in
wheelchairs. The woman couldn't abide the idea of existing in the same state of ill
health, and she walked out of the doctor's office without actually seeing him.

As she drove home filled with terror, the distraught woman began to notice
that some of the lawns of her neighborhood were of a lively green color, while
others looked brown and sick. It struck her that if the right lawn food could
improve the growth of grass, why should the human body not also respond in the
same way? Mrs. Lennox figured that with excellent nutrition, she could at least
keep going for, perhaps, another five years or until a cure for cancer might be
found. Then, inside her head, she heard a clear voice that said: “You can feed and
nourish your mind and body and become well again!”

At that point, she sped right past her house to a health food store for the
purpose of becoming educated about nutrition and cancer by the store proprietor
or in any other way available. Noting on the shop’s shelves that there were lots of
books on dieting for weight loss, the patient asked specifically about cancer
treatment information. In considering Mrs. Lennox’s situation, the store owner
directed her to Dr. Gerson’s book A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases

“The Gerson cancer protocol is the hardest therapy to follow but the best,” this
natural food store proprietor said. Consequently, this desperate victim of cancer
purchased the book.

The dietary program in Dr. Gerson’s text frightened her at first, but Mrs.
Lennox telephoned the Gerson Institute in Bonita, California, and four days later
arrived at a Tijuana, Mexico, hospital that offered medically supervised Gerson
Therapy.

She came alone, accompanied by a great deal of negativity voiced in
Standard Gerson Therapy for Most Cancers 183

letters and telephone calls from her family. Still, the woman persisted. Over
time, laboratory tests showed her steady improvement and eventually she
returned to Sacramento to treat herself.

After two years on the Gerson Therapy, Alexandra Lennox finally could
consider herself as having succeeded against breast cancer. She had saved both of
her breasts and was flourishing. Sexual relationships with men began again. Her
girlfriends described her to others as vivacious, verbal, intelligent, and looking
“veally fabulous.” After some two years more, she felt at the peak of her abilities.

SUMMARIZING THE STANDARD GERSON THERAPY

FOR DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
What did Mrs. Alexandra Lennox do to restore her health and eliminate
cancer as well as her other health problems? Following is a summary of the
standard Gerson Therapy for degenerative diseases.
This chapter presents the standard Gerson Therapy protocol being followed
by those degenerative disease patients not attempting to cope with treatment
complications. The chapter discusses:

* Why avoid drinking water when following the Gerson Therapy for
eliminating serious health problems;

* Why take thyroid extract on a regular basis five times per day;

¢ Wht take Lugol (potassium iodide, half-strength) at the rate of eighteen drops
per day as cancer therapy;

¢ Why drink liquid potassium compound solution, 4 teaspoonfuls (tsp), ten times
per day, representing 2 grams or 50 mEq each of potassium acetate,
potassium gluconate, and potassium monophosphate (but not for certain
cancer patients);

* Why consume cold-pressed flaxseed oil, 1 tablespoonful (tbs) twice daily (with
a reduction of this food oil after four weeks to 1 tbs per day);

* Why follow the juicing procedure which requires the daily drinking of thirteen
8-ounce glasses of apple/carrot, carrot alone, green leaf, and/or orange
juices;

* Why ingest macinina dose of 50 mg six times per day;

¢ Why supplement with porcine pancreatin, three 325-mg enzyme tablets four
times per day;

© Why receive a crude liver/By intramuscular injection of 100 meg Biz with 3 cc
of crude liver extract each day;

© Why take Acidol® (betaine hydrochloride and pepsin), two capsules three times
per day before meals;

* Why take coenzyme Qio, with its variable dosage;
184 THE GERSON THERAPY

* Why take laetrile (amygdalin), useful for all primary cancers but specifically
indicated for bone cancer metastases;

* Why use Wobe-Mugos® or Megazyme Forte®, the enzymes for counteracting
gastrointestinal gas and for reducing tumor masses;

* Why take brewer's yeast with both its positive and negative effects (for
instance, it’s contraindicated for cancer patients);

* Why receive five 32-ounce coffee enemas administered daily for a variable
period of up to two years;

* Why ingest castor oil (orally and rectally) every other day as a treatment;

© Why undergo changes in medications within the first year.

Considered the foundation for the Gerson Therapy, brief sketches of the topics
we provide in this chapter only slightly duplicate treatment instructions which
have gone before (or may come after). Indeed, this chapter could be considered
the pivot for our entire book and likely will be referred to often by readers
attempting to help themselves or loved ones conquer degenerative diseases of all
types, but most especially the various cancers and leukemias.

THE REASONS FOR AVOIDING WATER AS A BEVERAGE

Usually, the public is told that, in order to maintain body functions at
optimum levels, people should drink about eight 8-ounce glasses (64 ounces or 2
quarts) of water daily. On the Gerson Therapy the rules are different. We must
study water from a number of angles to understand why this rule changes.

First, when people eat a salty diet, they are naturally thirsty, for our human
physiology forces them to drink enough water to hold excess sodium in solution.
If it is too concentrated, sodium buildup causes problems in the blood serum as
well as in the cells.

The sodium in salt can kill As reported worldwide, on July 27, 1999,

Leroy Elders, a three-month-old baby boy in Great Britain, died of a salt overdose
after his young parents fed him adult food. London newspapers explained that
the child’s parents fed him oat breakfast cereal and mashed potato with gravy
because they found infant food too expensive. After an autopsy, the baby’s
pediatrician said, “Leroy’s body contained nine grams of salt, compared with a
recommended daily maximum of seven grams for adult males. The amount of
sodium was too high for the baby’s kidneys to process, and it poisoned him to
death.”2

Second, another cause of thirst is eating a diet high in animal proteins and fats.
The intermediate or end-products of protein and fat digestion are disturbing to
the system and cause the person consuming them to feel thirsty. Nutritionists
have observed that fruitarians (people who eat only fruit) don’t usually become
Standard Gerson Therapy for Most Cancers 185

thirsty. Fruit contains natural distilled water and is easily digested without
causing any toxic residue; therefore, the body does not require additional liquids.

Dr. Max Gerson prohibited patients on the Gerson Therapy from drinking
water for several reasons. First, Gerson patients consume thirteen 8-ounce glasses
(225 cc) of freshly squeezed juices each day—a lot of liquid. Second, Gerson
patients also eat unsalted soup twice a day, giving them additional liquids. These
two particular components of the Gerson Therapy diet add up to about 4 liters of
fluid intake daily, which is more than adequate for human needs.

Some patients on the Gerson program, however, still request additional
liquids, or they awaken during some nights with the need to drink more fluids.
Since ill persons such as these are not allowed to drink water, they should be
provided with herbal teas, such as peppermint, orange blossom, linden blossom,
and/or tahebo (lapacho or pau d’arco). A quantity of such teas should be stored
in a thermos bottle on a night table, right next to the bed. Also, if the patient has
difficulty falling to sleep, certain herbs such as valerian make sleep-inducing teas.

Third, Dr. Gerson did not allow patients to drink water because it tends to
dilute stomach acid and the gastrointestinal tract’s own digestive juices. It is well
known that patients suffering from chronic diseases generally are low in gastric
acid, which makes it unwise to allow them to drink water. Dr. Gerson observed
that if his patients drank water, their digestion suffered, creating gas and other
intestinal discomforts. In contrast, if someone already in intestinal distress drinks
peppermint tea, it stimulates digestion and relieves gas or other digestive
problems.

Please note: All black and/or green teas containing caffeine (similar to coffee)
should be considered drugs, and their consumption on the Gerson Therapy is
forbidden.

Fourth, the quality of tap water in the United States is often toxic. In fact,
fluoridated or chlorinated tap water in more than 60 percent of American cities or
larger communities is responsible for illnesses. Chlorine and especially fluorine
are highly detrimental substances; both are in the chemical family of the halogens
and have similar properties. Fluorine, second in toxicity only to arsenic, is
extremely active and can displace the less active elements in the halogen family,
chlorine and iodine. Fluorine is a carcinogen and deadly poison foisted on United
States residents with support from the American Dental Association.234’"

Fluoride was originally a highly toxic by-product of the aluminum industry.
When it was released into the regular sewer system, it killed millions of fish
downstream, which eventually led to the prohibition of this practice. From then
on, fluoride had to be specially disposed of, a very expensive process. The
aluminum industry figured out a way to sell the fluoride in large amounts, rather
than having to dispose of it, and hit on the idea of adding it to the drinking water.
They, in turn, enlisted the American Dental Association to support the idea (this
186 THE GERSON THERAPY
was not the original idea of the ADA).

How Drinking Fluoridated Water Can Damage the
Thyroid

Because iodine is an essential element in the body, it’s needed by the thyroid
gland to produce the hormone thyroxine. This hormone is extremely important
since it controls metabolism, the rate at which food is burned. It is also an
essential part of the immune system Thyroxine controls, through body
temperature variations, an individual's normal temperature or fever if needed to
overcome infection.

When the thyroid gland’s function is lowered by the consumption of fluorine
(or chlorine) in drinking water, iodine is displaced from the gland. This weakens
the immune system Then a person's physiology is beset by three types of
pathology: (1) it’s unable to produce fever, (2) allergies and infections result, and
(3) food fails to be burned adequately. These three pathologies result in a lack of
energy and the storage of calories as excessive fat. As shown, fluoridated and/or
chlorinated drinking water becomes the source of such thyroid gland pathology.

Another problem of low thyroid function is the development and deposit of
plaque in the arteries, called arteriosclerosis or hardening of the arteries. This
leads to poor blood supply to the heart, the brain, and the extremities. Too often,
heart attacks and strokes are the result of arteriosclerosis. Endocrinologist Broda
Barnes, M.D., demonstrated that low thyroid function and heart attacks are
directly related. By administering thyroid extract to his affected patients, Dr.
Barnes was able to reverse the formation of arteriosclerosis and overcome their
difficulties with heart disease.

With similar kinds of disease reversal occurring from the ingestion of thyroid,
it becomes obvious why Gerson Therapy patients take thyroid extract on a
regular basis five times per day.

In the presence of low thyroid function, moreover, cancer rates go up. Many
years ago, in certain areas of the United States, it was noted that an unusually
high number of people suffered from goiters (Graves’ disease). An affected
person's body enlarges the thyroid gland in its attempt to help that gland
produce more thyroxine.

The reason this problem exists is lack of iodine in the soil and in the diet of
people living in those areas. If adequate iodine is supplied, most enlarged glands
usually go back to their normal size. It was noted that in these “goiter belts”
around the United States there was also a higher cancer incidence. In an effort to
furnish the population in such goiter belt areas with iodine, the U.S. government
introduced “iodized salt.” Since it is assumed that everybody consumes salt, the
Standard Gerson Therapy for Most Cancers 187

bureaucrats’ thinking was that this iodine addition to salt would supply the
necessary mineral to the entire population. They were right—goiters almost
disappeared after the iodizing of salt.

Why LUGOL’S SOLUTION IS REQUIRED IN THE GERSON THERAPY
But iodized salt presents a new problem: as illustrated earlier by the death of
the three-month-old British baby, salt is a damaging and deadly chemical. Dr.
Gerson found that the beginning of all chronic disease is marked by the loss of
potassium from the cell and the invasion of sodium chloride, the flavoring
chemical compound that comprises salt. Salt inhibits enzyme production at the
cellular level. Furthermore, salt promotes excessive cellular mitosis (cell division).
In other words, it promotes can-
cer. Obviously, we must avoid taking in salt, and must obtain the body's needed
iodine from other sources.

In order to restore the thyroid and basal metabolism as well as the most
important physiological functioning of his patients, the immune system, Dr.
Gerson used Lugol's solution, half-strength. Lugol’s is a 5 percent solution of
potassium iodide, iodine, and water. This enables patients as well as healthy
people to obtain iodine without ingesting harmful sodium.

TAKING LIQUID POTASSIUM COMPOUND SOLUTION

Until their blood tests have been analyzed, patients with any history of cardiac
insufficiency, episodes of myocardial infarction, transient ischemic attack, or
other types of cardiovascular complications should not receive potassium
medicinal ingredients. Otherwise, potassium compound solution (a liquid) is
recommended for use in the Gerson therapeutic program in an amount of 4
teaspoonfuls (tsp), ten times per day. This dosage represents approximately 3 1/2
grams or 50 mEq each of potassium acetate, gluconate, and monophosphate (a
total of 14 grams or 150 mEq/ day).

Gerson patients presenting themselves with a history of kidney (renal)
insufficiency or dysfunction, gastritis, nausea, significant bone metastasis, or any
indication of bleeding problems should be started with just 1 tsp of potassium
compound solution ten times a day. Dosages may be slowly increased with the
patient maintained under observation by the Gerson Therapy medical adviser.

RIDDING YOUR DRINKING WATER OF FLUORINE AND CHLORINE
In order to maintain the normal thyroid function, it is imperative that healthy
188 THE GERSON THERAPY

persons, and particularly any Gerson Therapy patients, avoid chlorine and
fluorine, which damage the thyroid gland. If tap water is chlorinated, the chlorine
pollutant can be destroyed by boiling it.

But boiling one’s drinking water does not get rid of fluorine’s toxic effects. On
the contrary, since fluoride is added to water in the form of sodium fluoride, a
salt, boiling the water concentrates the fluoride. Some of the water evaporates and
less water volume is left to dilute the fluoride salts.

Also, various filter systems are commercially distributed for people who are
aware of water pollution or contamination. Unfortunately, the filters remove
mutch, but not all of the fluorides. Even a small amount left in the water is harmful
and cannot be tolerated by a seriously ill person. Therefore, if tap water is
fluoridated, it should be distilled to remove all the fluoride salts and make it
acceptable for the Gerson patient. It is also important to use a carbon filter in the
water purifier, since certain volatile fractions, such as commercially manufactured
benzenes and other solvents, pass through the distillation process.

A number of articles have been published in magazines about the possible
danger of drinking distilled water. It is claimed that distilled water “leaches”
minerals from the body. Such leaching, if it really does occur, is not a problem
First of all, minerals contained in some spring waters are inorganic minerals and
are poorly absorbed (that’s why we need to eat plants: they have enzymes that
convert the inorganic minerals to an organic form that the human body can easily
assimilate). Furthermore, these inorganic minerals are not in good balance; often
they contain too much sodium and calcium, along with frankly harmful nitrates
and nitrites. In some cases, well-meaning distributors of mineral drinking water
and bottled water even add fluorides to their product. That's the wrong thing to
do!

It must be emphasized that the body’s requirement for minerals should not
come from drinking water but from fresh fruit, salads, and vegetable juices. These
are amply supplied by the Gerson Therapy diet plan.

Now readers may well ask: If Gerson Therapy patients cannot drink water,
why worry about its purity? Here are our answers:

1. While it is true that Gerson patients are not allowed to drink water, they
are still going to eat soup made with water, drink teas made with water,
and cook some vegetables with a minimal amount of water.

2. More important, patients have three to five coffee enemas daily, made
with water, of course. These healing enemas are extremely important to
help detoxify the liver. But the colon is a highly absorptive organ. Not
only is caffeine absorbed from the coffee enemas, but chemical additives
in the water are easily absorbed, as well. Water used for enemas should
be the purest available.
Standard Gerson Therapy for Most Cancers 189

3. The fluoride molecule is a very small and active molecule and is passed
rapidly not only through the colon into the bloodstream, but also through
the skin. The water used for all the needs of the patient, including soup,
teas, cooking, internal enemas, and external washing, must be free of
chlorine and fluorine as well as other pollutants.

4. The water must be purified for any internal purpose. Each time the
American Dental Association and its members recommend that people
ingest fluorine, almost all of us who follow such an erroneous
endorsement become poisoned. Water purification can help eliminate
this.

WHY COLD PRESSED FLAXSEED OIL Is INGESTED

Dr. Gerson, in his earlier work with tuberculosis patients and with persons
suffering from many other chronic diseases, was very much aware that these
people required some essential fatty acids in their diet. Until he discovered that
cancer patients could not tolerate any fats, he used raw egg yolks and a little salt-
free butter for noncancerous patients. Yet when tumors in his cancer patients
disappeared and he wanted to add some oil, egg yolks, or butter to the
individuals’ nutrition, he found that their cancer returned.

Since other doctors and researchers were not able to observe cured cancer
patients, he had no guidance in regard to this cancer regrowth. Dr. Gerson,
therefore, had to experiment on his own patients. He selected those ill people
who were affected with external cancers (skin malignancies such as inflammatory
breast disease), those lesions which were easily observed. Then, cautiously, after
tumors had already disappeared, he added one or another nutritional oil to the
patient's diet. Invariably, in a relatively short time (a week or two) the already
closed or healed lesion would recur, and tumors grew back. As soon as he
omitted the food grade oil or fat, the tumors disappeared again.

Dr. Gerson tried every kind of polyunsaturated oil, all of the many mo-
nounsaturated oils such as olive oil, plus nut and seed oils, and others. He found
none that were safe for the cancer patients during the process of healing and
restoring one’s body. For this reason he specified in his famous book, A Cancer
Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases, that “No Fats, No Oils” be used in all the directions
for the patient's therapy.°
He finally discovered that it took up to eighteen months, well after the patients’
essential organs and digestive system were restored, before he could give these
patients a little salt-free butter or vegetable oil. Yet he continued to search, since
he was well aware of the importance of the essential fatty acids.

Finally, in 1958, after his book was in print, during the last year of his practice
and life, Dr. Max Gerson ran across the work of Johanna Budwig, Ph.D., who had
190 THE GERSON THERAPY

also studied essential fatty acids. Dr. Budwig (still living in Germany and a
candidate for the Nobel prize in medicine) had found that flaxseed oil (linseed oil)
is different from any other dietary fat or oil and is beneficial for the cancer patient
without causing any new problems.

By a strange twist of fate, Dr. Gerson remembered that his father’s business
consisted of pressing flaxseeds. Yet he had never thought of this product for
application in his practice. Dr. Gerson then proceeded to try it immediately on his
own patients, and he found that, indeed, the flaxseed oil did improve the results
of his cancer treatment. Apparently, the fatty acids helped to carry vitamin A
(beta carotene) through the bloodstream to increase the patient's immune
response. Aside from this, since flaxseed oil is high in linoleic and linolenic acids,
these two omega-3 essential fatty acids helped to dissolve atherosclerotic plaque,
thus improving blood circulation. In that way, ingesting flaxseed oil provides the
sick (or normal) individual with another benefit.

We are fortunate that we are now able to obtain flaxseed oil from organically
grown flaxseed, pressed under cooled conditions (since heat damages the oil),
bottled in black plastic so that light cannot oxidize the
oil, and carefully refrigerated by health food (natural food) store proprietors.
Obviously, it is imperative for this oil to be protected from air, light, and heat to
keep it from becoming rancid.

This oil is tasty, with a nutlike flavor, in salad dressings, replacing other oils.
When freshly produced and promptly shipped, flaxseed oil will keep in the
freezer for about six months and in the refrigerator unopened for three months.
But once the bottle is opened, even when kept refrigerated, flaxseed oil should be
consumed within three weeks. It should never be heated, never be used to cook,
bake, or fry anything. It is also unwise to use flaxseed oil in hot soup, or on baked
potatoes just removed from the oven and steaming hot. A baked potato should be
allowed to cool to a comfortable eating temperature before adding the oil. Do not
eat flaxseeds themselves, either whole or crushed, but take only the oil, for it is a
medication. Compliance by the patient to prescribed dosages (avoiding over- or
underuse) is vital for the best healing.”

Since Dr. Gerson didn’t mention flaxseed oil in his book for the reason given
above, there were no other directions for amounts to be used Fortunately, we
found a letter by Dr. Gerson to his great friend, Nobel laureate Albert Schweitzer,
in which he describes not only the good results obtained since he applied the
flaxseed oil, but the amounts used. Gerson writes that during the first four weeks
on the treatment, his patients are alotted 2 tablespoonfuls a day (1 tbs at lunch
and 1 at dinner). Then for succeeding months, the amount is reduced to 1 tbs a
day. The Gerson Institute still uses this same prescription with good success. Ina
few patients, the amounts of flaxseed oil have to be adjusted depending on sev
eral factors: serum electrolyte tests, HDL and LDL cholesterol levels, and
Standard Gerson Therapy for Most Cancers 191
triglyceride levels.

SUPPLEMENTATION WITH NIACIN/NICOTINIC ACID (VITAMIN B;)

For cancer patients with little or no history of chemotherapy, who have gone
through no ostomy or other surgical interventions, supplementation with
niacin/nicotinic acid (vitamin Bz) is appropriate. Niacin is an integral part of the
Gerson Therapy protocol. Its standard dosage is 50 mg six times per day.

Patients for which this vitamin is absolutely contraindicated are those with a
history of bleeding, ulcers, gastritis, and those concurrently receiving prednisone,
other steroids, or Coumadin.

Alternatively, patients with liver (hepatic) insufficiency, primary or metastatic
tumor activity in the liver, hepatitis of any type (A, B, C, D, or E), or cirrhosis of
the liver may receive a maximum of 100 mg to 150 mg of niacin daily.

SUPPLEMENTATION WITH PANCREATIN

Dr. Gerson wrote: “I found pancreatin [pure pancreatic enzyme derived from
crude pork pancreas extract from New Zealand] in many cases a valuable help in
the therapy. A few patients cannot stand pancreatin; the majority are satisfied to
have less digestive trouble with gas spasms and less difficulty in regaining
weight and strength. We use the tablets after the detoxification; each contains five
grains and is uncoated. The patient takes three or four tablets three times after
meals, and later less.”®

As Dr. Gerson did, complementary and alternative medicine (C AM) physician
Michael B. Schachter, M.D., of Suffern, New York, often prescribes oral pancreatic
enzymes to be taken with meals to help break down proteins, fats, and
carbohydrates.

They also serve a more cancer-specific function. When taken between meals,
some of these enzymes are absorbed intact and can have systemic effects that are
beneficial to the cancer patient. The actions include an anti-inflammatory effect
and a tendency to dissolve the protective coating around cancer cells.°

The pancreatic enzymes in pancreatin “digest away the protein coating which
protects cancer cells from being destroyed by our immune system,” explains
CAM physician Robert C. Atkins, M.D., of New York City. In effect, pancreatic
enzymes remove the “shield” that otherwise enables cancer cells to protect
themselves. “It’s fascinating how many of the successful cancer programs that I
have studied incorporate pancreatic enzymes,” says Dr. Atkins.1°
192 THE GERSON THERAPY
TAKING CRUDE LIVER/B,, INJECTIONS

It's advantageous for patients with degenerative disease to receive a once-daily
intramuscular injection of 100 mcg vitamin By (cyanocobalamin) with 3 cc of
crude liver extract. Unless a patient exhibits excessive blood levels of vitamin Biz
or has an allergic reaction to Biz, there is no known contraindication for its use.

SWALLOWING ACIDOL CAPSULES BEFORE MEALS
For patients without complications, two capsules of the combination betaine
hydrochloride and pepsin product named Acidol are swallowed three times per
day before meals. However, people experiencing gastric ulcers, gastritis, severe
nausea, intestinal bleeding, or esophageal problems should not receive Acidol.
Patients taking Coumadin concurrently with the Gerson Therapy also should
avoid this product.

COENZYME Q,, SUPPLEMENTATION

Almost classified as a vitamin, coenzyme Qio is essential for generating
energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in living organisms that
use oxygen. It’s not considered a vitamin, however, because the body
produces it’s own CoQy)

CoQx) plays a vital role in the physiology’s antioxidant system When
combined with vitamin E, selenium, and beta carotene, CoQx) can significantly
reduce free radical damage in the liver, kidney, and heart tissues 11.

The Gerson Institute recommends initially dosing with 90 mg of coenzyme
CoQx) once per day. If no side effects are experienced (primarily tachycardia or
arrhythmia), the patient may increase the dosage to 300 mg on the second day
and then 600 mg on the third day and thereafter.

THE LEGITIMACY OF SUPPLEMENTING WITH LAETRILE

“After years of observing patients using amygdalin [laetrile], I can say with
complete assurance that it is neither toxic nor worthless,’ says Douglas Brodie,
MLD., of Reno, Nevada. “Nor do I find it to be a cure or panacea for cancer. The
experience of my clinic, like that of many clinics worldwide, is that amygdalin
has the ability to improve the patient's sense of wellbeing, relieve the pain of
cancer, and reduce the requirement for pain medication.”

Cancer specialist Etienne Callebout, M.D., of London, England, says:
“Amygdalin deserves to have a regular place in cancer therapy. It is non- toxic
and water-soluble, and there is considerable evidence that it works against
Standard Gerson Therapy for Most Cancers 193

cancer.”18

Laetrile has strong cancer-fighting potential with regard to secondary
cancers, including a 60 percent reduction in lung metastases; other research
indicates it can extend the lives of both breast and bone cancer patients.1415

The legitimacy of supplementing with laetrile is assured by the success of
its ongoing use for cancer these past forty years. Although pain reduction
success takes a minimum of ten days to two weeks of daily administration,
laetrile is indicated for bone metastases. Dr. Brodie prefers a dosage of 9 grams
per intravenous (IV) application. Those not taking IV laetrile who want it may
supplement with 500 mg of oral amygdalin three times a day, continuing with
this dosage even after the physical evidence of cancer has disappeared.

TAKING WOBE-MUGOS® OR MEGAZYME FORTE®
The two imported German enzymes Wobe-Mugos® and Megazyme Forte are
derived from both vegetable and animal sources. Both of them are protein-
digesting (proteolytic) enzymes used defensively against tumors. They contain
the enzymatic substances pancreatin, papain, bromelain, trypsin, chymotrypsin,
lipase, amylase, and rutin (a bioflavonoid), which are indicated primarily when
the sick person suffers from severe, excessive gas.

Some reports advise that these two enzymes are helpful in shrinking malignant
masses. Their administration is in the form of injections, tablets or suppositories.
These supplements offer the degenerative diseased patient an enhancement of
whole-body metabolism.

CAUTION IN TAKING BREWER'S YEAST

Originally Dr. Max Gerson had made brewer's yeast a part of his therapeutic
program, but that was long before the advent of Candida allicans infection which
brings about the yeast syndrome. And it had been introduced by him as
treatment for cancer patients prior to his use of liver juice.

Under most circumstances today, brewer's yeast is seldom recommended any
longer for cancer therapy owing to an ever-increasing risk of candidiasis, which
brings on extreme abdominal distension and gas. Little clinical benefit has been
observed from taking brewer's yeast.

In cancer patients, negative responses have been noted after ingestion of
brewer's yeast, and it is speculated that the substance is no longer as effective as
in Dr. Gerson’s day. That's because cancer patients have undergone an increase
in their acidity; thus, brewer's yeast is not for them. They seem to have a much
greater presence of the pathological candida organisms in their bodies because of
194 THE GERSON THERAPY

dietary changes and other environmental factors.

COFFEE ENEMAS ARE HIGHLY RECOMMENDED

As advised in chapters 12 and 13, five 32-ounce enemas made with coffee
beverage are highly recommended for patients suffering from degenerative
diseases. They should be taken each day in slowly diminishing numbers for a
variable period of up to two years. Each coffee enema helps to purge the colon
and liver of accumulated toxins, dead cells, and waste products.

The coffee enema is prepared by brewing organic caffeinated beans and letting
the brew cool to body temperature, then delivering it via an enema bag. Coffee
contains choleretics, substances that increase the flow of toxin-rich bile from the
gallbladder. The coffee enema is probably the only pharmaceutically effective
choleretic noted in the medical literature that can be safely used many times daily
without toxic effects.1°

Dr. Gerson recognized early in his therapeutic approach that the coffee enema
is effective in stimulating a complex enzyme system involved in liver
detoxification, which we described in some of our prior chapters as the
glutathione S-transferase enzyme system The increased activity of these enzymes
ensures that free radical activity is greatly diminished and that the pathology-
producing actions of carcinogens are blocked.”

Caffeine additionally stimulates dilation of blood vessels and relaxation of
smooth muscles, which further increases bile flow; this effect does not happen
when the coffee is consumed daily. In fact, the only beneficial way to ingest coffee
is through the rectum.

ROUTINE CASTOR OIL TREATMENT

In following the Gerson Therapy, the application of castor oil treatment is
routine. Dr. Gerson recommended its use by mouth and by enema for the
elimination of toxic diarrhea, vomiting of bile, and other strong reactions. He
wrote, “These strong reactions are actually indications of the beginning of
improvement, with increased bile production, greater activity of the liver and
elimination of toxins and poisons. After a period of one or two days, patients feel
greatly relieved, show better circulation, complexion and color, and have more
appetite.”18

Tumors and cysts of all sizes may also be reduced in volume or eliminated
altogether with the application of castor oil packs. In an examination of the
immune-stimulating properties of castor oil packs conducted on thirty-six people,
those receiving the packs showed significant improvement in the total production
of lymphocytes and other immune cells.1°
Standard Gerson Therapy for Most Cancers 195

CHANGING MEDICATIONS WITHIN THE FIRST YEAR OF

TREATMENT

Approximately one month after discharge from inpatient treatment (about six
to nine weeks after admission to a Gerson hospital and start of therapy), thyroid,
potassium, and Lugol medications are reduced. Other supplements are generally
kept at initial levels. Potassium is typically dropped from 40 tsp per day to 20 tsp
per day. Thyroid is lowered to between 2 and 3 grains per day. Lugol is reduced
to six drops per day.

Often these medication levels are maintained for nine to fourteen months,
and other supplemental adjustments will be based on diagnostic blood work and
other means of diagnosis. This is a change in protocol from Dr. Gerson's original
presentation in his book as produced more than forty years ago. Instead, patients
must now be kept on higher dosages of the three main medications for longer
periods than in Dr. Gerson’s day. When medications are reduced too rapidly,
sick people often experience difficulties and a slowing of recovery or a recurrence
of disease.

The standard Gerson Therapy is strictly for uncomplicated cancer or other
degenerative disease patients. Modifications from the program occur when
chemotherapy is used before this natural and nontoxic protocol is instituted.
Unfortunately, it becomes more difficult to treat the patient, as is explained in
chapter 15.

References for Chapter Fourteen

1. Nordwall, S.P “Salt poisoning.” USA Today. July 28, 1999, p. 6A.

2. Cousins, G. “Health today.” New Frontier. May 1994.

3. Valerian, V “On the toxic nature of fluorides, part 2: fluorides and cancel.”
Perceptions. September/October 1995, pp. 30-37.

4. Glasser, G. “Dental fluorosis: a legal time bomb.” Health Freedom News
July 1995, pp. 40-45.

5. Yiamouyiannis, J. Fluonde: The Aging Factor. Delaware, Ohio: Health
Action Press, 1993, p. 61.

6. Gerson, M. A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases and The Cure 0/ Advanced
Cancer by Diet Therapy. A Summary of Thirty Years of Clinical Experimentation, 5th
ed. Bonita, Calif.: The Gerson Institute, 1990, p. 242.

7. The Gerson Therapy Physicians Trairmng Manual. Bonita, Calif.: The Gerson
Institute, 1996, p. 114.

8. Op. cit., Gerson, M., pp. 211,212.

9. Diamond, WJ.; Cowden, WL.; Goldberg, B. An Alternative Medicine
Definitive Guide to Cancer. Tiburon, California: Future Medicine Publishing, Inc.,
1997, p. 375.
Chapter Fifteen

MODIFIED THERAPY
DURING CHEMOTHERAPY

L n 1996, forty-six-year-old F.C., a housewife and piano teacher, underwent a
mammogram followed by an ultrasound diagnostic procedure in her
hometown of Stockport. To complete her evaluation for breast cancer, she had a
needle biopsy, which showed an infiltrating carcinoma measuring 2.5 centimeters
(cm). In the course of the subsequent mastectomy, fifteen lymph nodes were
removed, fourteen of which proved to be malignant. X-ray examination also
showed that the cancer had spread to her lungs.

Her doctors ordered chemotherapy, and a twelve-treatment protocol was
initiated and scheduled to last a complete year. The cytotoxic agents planned for
her are known to be exceedingly aggressive and tend to accumulate in the
patient's body tissues.

In the course of each month’s series of chemo treatments, Mrs. C. became so ill,
with unbearable nausea and vomiting lasting over multiple days and nights, that
she seldom slept and hardly ate. The woman dropped pounds of lean muscle
mass steadily. She says, “I couldn't tell you the horror of it”” Of course, she also
became totally bald.

The chemotherapy seriously reduced her white blood count too, causing an
extreme depletion of white blood cells (neutropenia), indicating that her immune
system had been devastated. Since neutrophils are an important part of the
immune system, their complete suppression caused the patient to suffer multiple
types of severe infections. Pneumonia, cold
sores, and other illnesses immediately followed each one of the separate monthly
chemotherapy courses.

In order to preserve her life by controlling the infections, Mrs. C. had to be
admitted to the hospital after each set of treatments. This situation became critical
and the doctors were forced to stop the chemotherapies after EC. had received
198 THE GERSON THERAPY

only nine courses of the proposed twelve. Her lungs were not improved. Cancer
remained as before and she was sent home classified as “terminal’ with no
further treatment available.

From a local naturopath, this dying cancer patient, whose severe illness had
been complicated by the cytotoxic agents, learned that the Gerson Therapy had
won cancer battles. In March 1997, Mrs. C. arrived at the Gerson treatment facility
in Tijuana, Mexico. She writes, “ felt immediately that this Gerson Hospital was a
place of healing.”

But for this particular ill woman, detoxification was not easy. She had ongoing
severe reactions to the prior chemotherapy with a lot of nausea and continuing
vomiting. Gradually, however, the Gerson Therapy did work and pulled the
accumulated poisons out of her body.

It took Mrs. C. several months to overcome the damage done by her chemo
treatment, experiencing about six months of attacks or flare-ups of symptoms
from chemicals lingering in the body. Such healing reactions are commonly
observed in most patients who have received the cumulative poisons of cytotoxic
agents.

About eight months into her Gerson Therapy regimen at home, the patient
finally felt much better. At that time, her friends said she looked much healthier,
and her demeanor actually became cheerful and vivacious. She still struggled
with occasional rushes of nausea, yet she marveled at the transformation in her
health.

Previously, upon her discharge from the Gerson Hospital, Mrs. C.’s X- ray
films, after she had been on her new dietary program for three weeks, had shown
such vast improvement that there was no further lung and breast tumor growth.
The cancers remained static in size. Also, the woman remarked then that
“spiritually and emotionally I am doing the right thing.”

With the passage of a year on the Gerson Therapy, the patient's healing
reactions were still coming occasionally from the prior chemotherapy. She writes,
“Many times my sense was that I was going through an internal storm, with
periods of calm coming on.” But it’s all turning out right for EC. She reports that
“now, my skin is glowing, my memory is improved, my hair has grown back
thick, and it shows beautiful texture without conditioner.”

One of the infections that had struck during the courses of chemotherapy was
a fungal growth of her toenails, especially of the big toes. Over a period of
months on the Gerson Therapy, those fungal areas grew out and she has normal
toenails once again. She says, “Seeing the new and clean toenails, I believe they
indicate that my immune system is improving. Also, the varicose veins in my left
leg are coming down and no longer stick out.”

During the six-month healing reaction she went through in late 1997, her skin
did show shades of gray coloring and she was again vomiting violently with
Modified Therapy During Chemotherapy 199

nausea so severe it kept her from sleeping. Mrs. C. explained, “This was a
situation very similar to what I experienced immediately after receiving
chemotherapy when I was so sick.” Now the stored chemicals were leaving her
body, but their poisoning effects continued to make her ill as they emptied out.

Mrs. C. also describes that six-month flare-up as seeming as if flu had invaded,
but she found that this healing reaction marked the turning point in her
conquering of cancer. The woman's outlook became much more positive. “The
Gerson Therapy not only heals mankind, but heals the environment,” she told us.

EC. is not yet fully recovered from the chemotherapy she had received. This
former cancer patient who has beaten back the tumors is more than twenty-six
months into the treatment and still experiences occasional healing reactions. We
are reporting her story because the Gerson Institute is frequently asked if there
are recovered cancer patients who had been treated with chemotherapy. We do
tell such patients that it takes longer to come back to good health after chemo —
but with perseverance, it is entirely possible. Mrs. C. may be considered typical of
how one can overcome breast cancer with metastases to the lungs even in the face
of having undergone exceedingly aggressive cytotoxic chemotherapy. This
chapter is dedicated to just such immune-compromised patients who have
undergone chemotherapy.

WHAT CHEMOTHERAPY IS AND WHAT IT DOES

The chemo part of chemotherapy means that chemicals are involved with some
process or procedure, and -therapy indicates that the procedure is being applied as
“treatment.” Therefore, the chemotherapy term simply advises that the cancer
treatment being applied employs chemicals (drugs).

Such chemicals administered as drugs destroy the cancer cells that they reach,
either by interfering with cellular growth or by preventing them from
reproducing. The various drugs work in different ways to interrupt each cancer
cell’s life cycle. Some affect the malignant cell during one or more of its phases of
growth and offer no adverse effect on the cell during the other phases; other
drugs affect the cell throughout its whole cycle of life.

The oncologist’s idea is to use chemotherapy as a main means for lowering the
multiplication of cancer cells or to destroy them altogether. It would be ideal if a
drug being administered spared healthy cells while destroying the deadly ones;
however, nearly every cancer chemotherapeutic agent destroys tissue cells —
pathological or physiological, sick or well, mutagenic or homeostatic. Almost all
of the chemotherapeutic agents in an oncologist’s armamentarium are cytotoxic,
with cyto referring to any cell and toxic pointing to poison.

These cytotoxic drugs go back to the 1940s when an observation at the Yale
200 THE GERSON THERAPY

University School of Medicine recognized that the potent World War I gas
nitrogen mustard had produced selective damage to the lymphatic system and
bone marrow of soldiers. This property, it was surmised, could be useful as
treatment against malignancies. Consequently, the first successful application of
chemotherapy took place at Yale in the mid-1940s with personnel of that
university adapting mustard gas as a method of cancer management. From this
practice, alkylating agents were created as cytotoxic therapy. The primary traits of
alkylating agents, such as cyclophosphamide, melphalan, and chlorambucil, are
that they link up with and destroy normal components of all cells, mainly their
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) genetic material.2

As with all tissue cells in plants and animals, human cancer cells possess DNA.
In fact, “cancer” is what happens when a part of one’s body grows in an
uncontrollable fashion and damages other healthy parts simply because a single
group of cells grows and multiplies in a disorderly and uncontrolled manner. So
cancer is a condition in which an abnormal body cell mutates and multiplies
uncontrollably.?

The reason that cellular growth irregularity occurs is that the DNA of one type
of cell becomes able to disobey or escape from the control mechanisms that
usually keep it growing in a normal, orderly way. The key to understanding the
nature of cancer is to find out what normally keeps the
DNA in order and how some cells’ DNA are able to escape from regimentation. If
medical scientists possessed such knowledge, they would understand what
causes cancer, which might help all of us work out how to prevent it.4

Not fully knowing the real reason for malignant disease to develop, any of us
experiencing tumor growth would benefit by personally applying the standard
Gerson Therapy. This will be the case unless a person’s immune system has been
compromised by pretreatment with the cytotoxic agents of chemotherapy. Then, a
lessened or reduced Gerson protocol has to be followed.

THE REDUCED GERSON PROTOCOL FOR CYTOTOXIN-
PRETREATED PATIENTS

As we are about to discuss in detail the Gerson Therapy as it relates to cancer
patients who have gone through extensive chemotherapy, this chapter is another
pivotal portion of our book. Numbers of people who suffer from cancer do
expose themselves to chemotherapy as a first resort when it probably should be
among the last treatment procedures followed. Be aware that chemotherapy
further degrades an already impaired immune system Note: all cytotoxic drugs
are carcinogens: they will cause future cancer.

In self-administering the Gerson Therapy, its medication protocol for any
Modified Therapy During Chemotherapy 201

chemotreated patients is different from the standard protocol. For instance, the
medication quantity varies considerably, and no absolute guidelines may be
given. Yet general information can be offered here about a reduced or less
intensive cancer protocol. The number of courses of cytotoxic treatment, their
dosages, and the specific drugs received must be considered. That's because use
of the full, unmodified Gerson protocol can be extremely dangerous for cancer
patients who have gone through extensive pretreatment with cytotoxic agents.

The following discussion of the reduced Gerson Therapy protocol is specific
for chemotherapy-exposed patients. Acting on such knowledge will help them to
respond more quickly and experience better long-term recoveries from their
cancers. Otherwise, a few uninformed cancer patients could self-medicate with
the more aggressive Gerson protocol we described in chapter 14, which could
inhibit their long-term recovery.

For someone ill with cancer, increasing the odds for survival and eventual
wellness will occur more quickly and efficiently by following certain admonitions
put forth by the Gerson Institute. These particular rules and recommendations are
the result of more than fifty years of experience and patient feedback with its use.

DAMAGED PHYSICAL CONDITIONING AFTER CHEMOTHERAPY

Everyone must realize that any form of chemotherapy is a precursor to
damaging the physical conditioning of all individuals who take in cytotoxic
agents of any kind. That's because the chemotherapeutic drugs enter the
bloodstream either directly by intravenous injection or indirectly by absorption
through the stomach or intestinal mucosa, after which the drugs are supposedly
transported to wherever tumor cells may be thriving. Administering chemical
treatment certainly is different from surgery and radiotherapy, which concentrate
their effects on some specific part or region of the body. Chemotherapy is used
when there is the possibility that cancer cells may be deposited in other places
besides the primary tumor, or may be circulating throughout the body via the
bloodstream$

As we showed in earlier chapters, chemotherapy seldom allows a five- year
survival of (“cures”) cancer—less than 15 percent of the time for all malignancies.
It may temporarily stop irregular cellular growth, or the drug given may relieve
pain and allow life to continue somewhat longer.° But, in our opinion
chemotherapy as a first recourse is a mistake. Rather, it should be employed as a
last resort if other, more gentle treatments have failed.

Over sixty-five commercially available cytotoxic drugs are employed in cancer
chemotherapy, and an equal number are being tested right now in clinical trials.
Some chemotherapeutic agents produce minor difficulties in the form of adverse
202 THE GERSON THERAPY

side effects such as sleepiness, general fatigue, diarrhea, hair loss, sore mouth,
low blood counts, nausea, and vomiting. These are the immediate side effects
most often known because a cancer patient experiences them openly and
obviously.

What's rarely discussed between oncologist and patient, however, are the
other, more serious extra effects which are residual, long-lasting, and have deeper
ramifications for one’s deteriorated quality of life.

The pretreated chemicalized patient is frequently left in a severely weakened
physical condition. Such a weakness arises from causing (1) depressed numbers of
blood components which carry oxygen and other nourishment to the cells, (2)
various cell mutations, which may finally produce the secondary cancers which
are common occurrences, (3) the acceleration of tumor growth rather than
shrinkage, (4) deep-seated poisonings of vital tissues unlikely to recover unless
the anticancer chemicals are detoxified from the cells of those damaged tissues.

These manifestations of physical weakness are major side effects rarely
discussed, but are the chief reasons to avoid taking chemotherapy with cytotoxic
drugs.

Even if the patient remains in good physical condition after undergoing
chemotherapy, here is a brief discussion of those adverse side effects mentioned:

1. Low Blood Counts

Prolonged depressed numbers of blood components arising from
chemotherapy lead to physical weakness, mental lethargy, chronic fatigue,
spiritual lassitude, emotional depression, and outright prostration. For instance, a
reduced number of white blood cells leaves the individual who has undergone
chemotherapy with a vulnerability to infection. The avoidance of anyone
suffering from a cold or flu therefore becomes absolutely mandatory. Also, the
resulting low platelet count from chemotherapy leads to easy bruising and
bleeding. Subsequently, the patient must take care to avoid cuts, burns, or injuries
and should steer clear of aspirin, alcohol, and other blood thinners. Sometimes, if
the person's platelet numbers drop exceedingly low, transfusions may become
necessary.”

2. Cell Mutations

Some years after chemotherapy has been received, patients may develop
secondary cancers such as acute leukemia. The International Agency for Research
on Cancer (IARC) has identified twenty different commonly used anticancer
agents which actually are powerful carcinogens in their own right.8° Such cancer-
causing occurrences are frequently associated with two particular popular
commercial alkylating agents, Cytoxan™ and Alkeran™, as well as almost all of
the hormone-like anticancer chemicals. Combinations of these deadly drugs given
Modified Therapy During Chemotherapy 203

to patients as a “cocktail” are even worse in their residual cancer aftereffects.

In his respected medical text Cancer. Principles and Practice of Oncology, the
staunch chemotherapy advocate Leonard DeVita, M.D., admits to the cancer-
promoting properties of cytotoxic drugs. Dr. DeVita states: “Chemotherapy
combinations can significantly raise the risk of secondary tumors, especially non
lymphocytic leukemias. The combination of cyclophosphamide, lomustine, and
vincristine [three cytotoxins | lead to a leukemia incidence of 14 percent over four
years after treatment. Nitrogen mustard, vincristine, prednisone, and
procarbazine for the treatment of Hodgkin’s disease yield leukemia rates up to 17
percent. .. . Radiation further increases the risk of leukemia.”

3. Acceleration of Tumor Growth

As a direct result of coming in contact with the very chemotherapeutic agents
which supposedly will shrink malignant tumors, sometimes the tumors are
accelerated in their growth. The cells which make up their structures become
seemingly drug-resistant and, in a paradox of purpose, are enhanced in their
ability to expand and metastasize. Clinical studies on patients and laboratory
investigations on animals have proven this paradox.10"2

4. Deep-seated Toxicity

Chemotherapy causes the tissues to undergo complex reactions from the
body's attempt to detoxify itself. Cytotoxic agents are the ultimate pollutants,
regarded as waste materials by the body, and the metabolism wants to release
such waste from its internal environment. During the course of this process, both
subclinical and obvious health problems develop internally.

The body organs protest the presence of medical poisons in several ways: (1)
by compromised functioning of the liver; (2) by development of an ongoing
diarrhea to flush out irritating bile; (3) by cramping pain in the lower abdomen;
(A) by flatulence and gas; and (5) by other general systemic symptoms manifested
as periodic flulike feelings of headaches, perspiration, strong body odor,
weakness, dizziness, fainting spells, intestinal spasms, and muscular aches and
pains.

These discomforts are indications of deep-seated poisons lodged within the
tissues from cytotoxics. They are poisonous reactions that show up subtly but
repeatedly. Once the cytotoxins are cleaned out by use of the Gerson Therapy,
these poisonings flare up as what the Gerson Institute personnel describe as
“healing reactions,” similar to those described earlier by EC.
204 THE GERSON THERAPY
CHEMOTHERAPY PRETREATMENT WITHOUT EXPERIENCING

WEAKNESS

We have stated that all chemotherapy is toxic; however, symptoms and signs
of resulting physical weakness do not necessarily show up in all eases. Subclinical
dysfunctions will likely be present from a patient's receiving toxic chemicals, but
obvious signs of such dysfunctions may remain unrecognized. And this set of
circumstances brings us to a situation of chemotherapy pretreatment without the
patient's experiencing any weakness.

A patient who accepts the Gerson Therapy after having undergone pre-
treatment with synthetic chemicals and drugs may have avoided experiencing
physical weakness. This chapter therefore advises how he or she can proceed in
the Gerson Therapy. The chug-treated person blessed with an absence of outward
adverse effects will have retained a normal appetite, remained ambulatory, and
resisted extreme weight loss. We're describing a truly lucky individual.

Even so, anyone fitting such a description should be receiving the reduced
Gerson protocol discussed in the balance of this chapter. The number of courses
of chemotherapy, dosages, and specific toxic drugs received must be considered
by the patient and any health professional advising on the Gerson Therapy.
Pursuing the full, unmodified Gerson protocol for any patient who has
undergone chemotherapy, regardless of the time elapsed since the last treatment,
can be extremely dangerous.

From the experiences of Gerson Institute personnel, we know that
chemotherapy pretreated patients respond more quickly and go through much
better long-term recovery when they follow the “reduced” or modified Gerson
protocol. Medicating with any aspect of the usual, more aggressive protocol will
be done at the expense of safety and long-term recovery. Consequently, we warn
that those patients having cancers complicated by chemotherapy should follow
the reduced Gerson Therapy program described below.

THE REDUCED GERSON PROTOCOL FOR CHEMICALLY TREATED
PATIENTS

Any person suffering from one or more degenerative diseases (with cancer
definitely among them) with a medical history of chemotherapy
should follow the following modified Gerson Therapy protocol 2 For example, as
described in A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases, by Max Gerson, M_D.,
drinking fresh-squeezed organic juices is a potent source of nourishment and an
exceedingly powerful detoxifying tool.1° Consuming juice is therefore done in a
different way for the cancer patient pretreated with chemicals.
Modified Therapy During Chemotherapy 205
Juice Consumption

For a cancer patient who has been chemicalized with toxic drugs, it’s advisable
to start the juicing regimen with only 2 to 4 ounces of fresh squeezed vegetable or
fruit juice. At the beginning of the juicing procedure, because of its strong
efficacy, temporarily eliminate the three recommended carrot-only juices.

And the dosage for any of the juices will vary depending on the patient's
condition, the ability to tolerate such juices, and any potential side effects which
result. If the patient can tolerate the smaller amount of juice, the juice quantities
are increased after two or three days. Typically, from 2 to 4 ounces, or four to six
ounces at a time, will be imbibed, and eventually, after seven to ten days,
progress will be made toward acceptance of the full 8-ounce portions. Finally, the
three carrot juices each day may be reintroduced to the chemicalized patient.

Care must be taken to ensure that the patient continues to tolerate all juices without
significant nausea or other side effects. If side effects do appear, cut back on the doses of
juice,

We recommend that patients should stay with the schedule of juice drinking
as follows: Each day it is best to ingest (a) one orange juice, (b) four green leaf
juices, (c) five apple/carrot juices, and (d) three carrot juices. To reduce nausea
and increase juice-drinking tolerance, add gruel to the juice up to a 50 percent
volume.

Potassium Compound Solution (Liquid)

The suggested starting dosage for potassium compound solution is 1 tsp ten
times per day, which represents approximately 500 mg or 12.5 mEq each of
potassium (K) acetate, gluconate, and monophosphate. This is a total K
combination of 1.5 grams or 37.5 mEq/ day.

In patients experiencing good condition despite chemotherapy, the normal
dosage of 4 tsp ten times per day may be cautiously achieved in several steps
over seven to ten days’ treatment, if no adverse side effects lie observed. Those
patients in less than ideal condition should have the dosage increased to 2 tsp ten
times daily, then carefully observed, very lowly increasing the dosage to 3, and
then 4, tsp ten times per day, as the patient is able to tolerate it.

There are contraindications to K compound solution: Patients presenting
themselves with a history of renal insufficiency or generalized kidney
dysfunction, gastritis, nausea, significant bone metastases, or any indication of
bleeding problems should be started with 1 tsp ten times per day. Dosage may be
slowly increased with observation of the compound's effects. Anyone with a
history of cardiac insufficiency, myocardial infarction, or congestive heart failure
should not receive potassium until blood laboratory work has been analyzed by a
physician.
206 THE GERSON THERAPY
Lugol (Potassium Iodide, KI, Half-Strength)

The recommended dose of Lugol is six drops per day. However, there are
contraindications to taking Lugol for chemo-pretreated patients. Furthermore, if
the individual has a history of allergy to iodine, Lugol is also not indicated, at
least initially; it can be cautiously added after three to five days, one drop to start,
then increasing as tolerance allows.

Patients with hepatic (liver) insufficiency, primary or metastatic tumor activity
in the liver, hepatitis, or hepatic cirrhosis should be started on one to two drops of
Lugol per day, to avoid bleeding or a decrease in blood platelets. Those patients
with bone metastases should also receive reduced Lugol to avoid excessive bone
deterioration and pain. Any patients known to be affected by heavy metal toxicity
should additionally receive doses of one to two drops per day initially.

Thyroid

Thyroid hormone is taken in a 1-grain dosage once or twice per day, but I here
are contraindications to thyroid usage similar to those for Lugol. Watch for signs
of hyperthyroidism, including tachycardia, anxiety, insomnia, and tremors.
Reduce dosage levels if any of these signs and symptoms are present. Also note
that transient tachycardia alone can be a toxic or flare-up reaction. Patients with a
history of cardiac insufficiency or other cardiac problems should be started on a
maximum of 2 grains of thyroid daily.
Niacin

This vitamin nutrient has a dosage of 50 mg six times per day. Some
contraindications do exist, such as for patients who present with hepatic
insufficiency, primal or metastatic tumor activity in the liver, hepatitis, or hepatic
cirrhosis. These patients should receive a maximum of 100 to 150 mg of niacin
daily. Those with a medical history of bleeding, ulcers, or gastritis, or who are

concurrently receiving prednisone, other steroids, or Coumadin should not
receive niacin.

Pancreatin

This pancreatic enzyme from the pig allows for a dosage of three 325-mg
tablets taken four times a day. It is contraindicated for sarcoma patients.
Crude Liver/B)2 Injection

This is taken once daily as an intramuscular injection in a dose of 100 mcg of
vitamin B12 with 3 cc of crude liver extract. Other than producing excessive levels
of vitamin By, and occasional allergic reactions, there is no known
contraindication for the crude liver/ By» injection.
Modified Therapy During Chemotherapy 207
Acidol

The gastrointestinal enzyme product known as Acidol (betaine hydrochloride
and pepsin) is taken in a dose of two capsules daily, three times a day before
meals. There are contraindications to this digestive aid consisting of gastric ulcers,
gastritis, severe nausea, intestinal bleeding, or esophageal problems. Patients with
these difficulties and those taking Coumadin should not receive Acidol.

Coenzyme Qio

While not a vitamin, coenzyme Qy) has vitamin-like properties. The initial
dosage is 90 mg once per day. If no side effects in the form of tachycardia or
arrhythmia arise, on the second day increase the dosage to 300 mg daily, and on
the third day increase the dose to 600 mg. Remain at that higher dosage
thereafter.

Wobe-Mugos and Megazyme Forte

These gastrointestinal enzymes are indicated primarily when the patient
suffers from severe, excessive gas. Some reports also indicate that the enzymes
may be helpful in reducing tumor masses.

Laetrile

Laetrile, known generically as amygdalin, is indicated for the treatment of
bone metastases, and it may be useful in the treatment of lung cancers. When
laetrile is available, it is primarily used to reduce pain levels, generally effective
ten days to two weeks after initial daily administration. The dosage is 3 grams (5
cc) intravenously once per day.

Brewer’s Yeast

This type of food yeast derived from the brewing of beer is not recommended
under most circumstances because of the risk of the yeast syndrome (candidiasis)
developing or worsening. Also, many people taking brewer's yeast report
extreme abdominal distension and gas.

Castor Oil Treatment

This plant oil is contraindicated in patients who have undergone
chemotherapy. Even so, castor oil treatment may be applicable to chemo patients
after six to nine months on the Gerson Therapy. Yet it should be taken with great
caution inasmuch as extremely toxic side effects can occur from the body's
resulting elimination of chemotherapy residues. Castor oil is a powerful
detoxifier, and long-buried cytotoxicity can come out of the tissues. Such a release
may produce severe healing reactions.
208 THE GERSON THERAPY
Coffee Enemas

As we have described in detail, coffee enemas are taken by chemo- pretreated.
patients in the amount of a 32-ounce enema two to three times per day. In some
people, this dosage will be reduced to half strength by mixing 16 ounces of
chamomile tea with 16 ounces of coffee. The enema dosage may gradually be
increased as needed, but care must be taken not to overstimulate the liver and
cause extremely toxic side effects from elimination of the chemotherapy residues
lodged within the body.

FOLLOW-UP THERAPY FOR THE CHEMO-PRETREATED CANCER
PATIENT

Follow-up therapy is required on this reduced Gerson protocol. Changes in
the medications will be made during the first year of treatment. For instance,
approximately one month after discharge from the inpatient treatment center
(probably six to nine weeks after admission to the Gerson hospital and start of the
Gerson Therapy), thyroid, potassium, and Lugol medications are adjusted. If the
patient has been on extremely reduced levels, these medications may be increased
by 25 to 50 percent. Other supplements are generally kept at initial levels.

If the patient was receiving normal levels of the Gerson protocol (e.g., 40 tsp
of potassium and eighteen drops of Lugol), these medication levels are reduced
by approximately 50 percent. The adjusted medication levels are generally
maintained for nine to fourteen months. Supplemental adjustments are often
made based on the diagnostic blood work and other diagnostic means.

Note that this follow-up protocol differs significantly from the information in Dr.
Gerson s original book “A Cancer Therapy.” Patients must now be kept on higher
dosages of the three main medications for longer periods than in Dr. Gerson’s
day. When medications are reduced too rapidly (such as scheduled in A Cancer
Therapy), patients often have difficulties and experience a slowing of recovery or a
recurrence of disease.

For those special patients who have undergone chemotherapy before
undertaking the Gerson Therapy, following the instructions in this chapter will
ensure health improvement and potential recovery from disease.

References for Chapter Fifteen

1. Morra, M.; Potts, E. Choices: Realistic Alternatives in Cancer Treatment. New
York: Avon Books, 1980, pp. 174, 175.

2. Moss, RW Questioning Chemotherapy. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Equinox Press, 1995,
p. 173.
210 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chapter Sixteen

MODIFIED THERAPY FOR
SEVERELY WEAKENED
CANCER PATIENTS

== Montreal, Quebec, Canada, Joergon van Zsidy, M.D., N.D., wants
people to know that he is a recovered liver cancer survivor. Dr. van Zsidy
entered the Gerson therapeutic program on his own when he was in the most
weakened state of his former degenerative illness. He’s in great shape now, but
during that terrible time for him, Dr. van Zsidy affirms, “I was just short of
death and sicker than anyone could ever imagine experiencing.
Unquestionably, the Gerson Therapy saved my life and it’s still working for me
today.”

In 1988, Dr. van Zsidy, a former practicing psychiatrist in the Netherlands,
but currently a naturopathic physician and university professor working in
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, noticed his prolonged, extreme tiredness and
energy lack—what is now recognized and referred to as chromic fatigue
syndrome. Simultaneously and close on the heels of his fatigue, Dr. van Zsidy
developed the additional discomforts of itchy spots over the length of his body,
depression, severe headaches, and nausea. At first, he tried treating himself.
“Even so,” he now admits, “I had a fool for a doctor and a second fool for a
patient.”

For the next several weeks, Dr. van Zsidy felt no improvement from his
personal ministrations. And then chronic constipation came upon him and
lingered for an overly long period. The constipation became so severe that, at
times, he didn’t move his bowels for five days. As a complication to his
constipation, chronic joint pain was always with him as a result of a long-
standing osteoarthritis, especially in both of his knees.
Modified Therapy for Severely Weakened Cancer Patients 211

To offset the ongoing knee pain, Dr. van Zsidy took aspirin and other
painkillers. However, with no letup to any of his symptoms, he began to query
health practioners he knew personally. Medical doctors whom he finally
consulted professionally for his diverse discomforts offered some treatment
suggestions from nebulous to insulting. Consequently, he decided to merely
live with his health problems and treat them as best he could.

A year later, the naturopathic physician turned patient had to cope with a
different set of signs and symptoms. His new difficulties involved fatty humps
(lipomas) that appeared under the skin, which, upon his undergoing biopsies at
several skin sites, proved negative for malignancy. But blood tests which were
part of his full diagnostic workup suggested hepatitis had come upon him, and
he proceeded to turn yellow with jaundice. Then weight loss began for Dr. van
Zsidy, and it became serious. After six months, by the time he had dropped 50
pounds, he had been hospitalized seven times to stop his vomiting, extreme
weakness, and swollen lymph nodes. Of course, the patient had long since
stopped treating himself and a bevy of medical specialists were tending to his
diverse needs. But nothing helped, and the vast number of signs and symptoms
remained.

Even under repeated examinations, no cancer was found until an internist
who took a computerized tomographic (CT) scan uncovered three lymph nodes
which did appear positive for malignancy. From undergoing many additional
laboratory and clinical tests, finally it was discovered that the right lobe of Dr.
van Zsidy’s liver had a number of small malignant tumors growing on it; in
addition, the liver’s left lobe showed a larger neoplasm 2 cm by 3 cm in size. If
the original diagnosis of hepatitis had been correct, it now had turned into a
verified hepatic cancer.

Fate still was not finished with the unfortunate man, for further disabilities
struck. The patient's feet swelled; his abdomen filled with fluid (ascites); the
cancerous liver greatly enlarged; food nauseated him; and pain in his knees
grew to be excruciating. Moreover, Dr. van Zsidy’s abdomen ached and
cramped continuously from what could be described as “chronic indigestion.”
The man felt absolutely miserable, weak and worn out, and he longed to be put
out of his misery.

However, chemotherapy was rejected by both his attending internist and the
consulting oncologist because they agreed that their patient was too far gone for
the cytotoxic agents to do any good; prednisone was ruled out owing to his
having had a prior bout with tuberculosis as a child. (Giving corticosteroids is
contraindicated when old and walled-off tubercular lesions are present.)

When Dr. van Zsidy’s weight dropped to just 97 pounds, and he was so
weak he couldn't leave his bed to eliminate body wastes, the patient and his
doctors were convinced that he would not survive more than a couple of days.
212 THE GERSON THERAPY

The man told his brother that he wanted to die at home in the mountains
surrounding Montreal, where he could view the river and hills. So the brother
immediately arranged for him to be taken there by ambulance. At his request,
the next-door neighbor, whom he considered a close friend, dug a grave in the
private family cemetery on the van Zsidy property. It was a sad undertaking.

Since he was incontinent and could no longer bear the loss of his personal
dignity, Dr. van Zsidy impatiently waited to die and seriously contemplated
speeding the event along by committing suicide. He tried this, but his complete
physical weakness prevented him from actually carrying out the act. So the
patient waited and suffered through his private hell on earth.

Despite his ingesting large numbers of painkilling drugs, bouts of gnawing,
aching, and sticking pain constantly interrupted the man’s sleep. Observing his
condition, one would be hard put to find any person more frail, miserable, and
weak than Joergon van Zsidy, M.D., N.D.

Then something happened which dramatically changed all aspects of his
situation. Dr. van Zsidy’s brother brought him a dog-eared copy of the third
revised edition of Dr. Max Gerson’s book to read, and it was an eye- opener for
him. This patient became determined to try the dietary therapy—a final
attempt that he would make to survive.

Dr. van Zsidy set about following the Gerson program. People around him,
family, friends, and neighbors, helped him to accomplish the Gerson approach
to cancer therapy. Among other procedures for this near-dead individual, he
regularly undertook detoxification by means of coffee enemas. In fact, Dr. van
Zsidy went overboard with the enemas by increasing their number to one
every hour (perhaps eight to ten more per day than he should have taken). His
loved ones helped him perform the procedures, and results from these enemas
were amazing to the patient and those who gave them to him The patient has
reported to us that he saw massive numbers of parasites in his stools and
smelled awful odors coming from them.

Also the man embarked on drinking huge amounts of fresh-squeezed, raw,
organic vegetable and fruit juices, eating organically grown vegetables as much
as he could hold, and taking the prescribed medications. Subsequently, Dr.
Joergon van Zsidy gained weight at the rate of up to 144 pounds per week. Soon
his weakness left and energy returned. After eight months, the arthritis in his
knees disappeared entirely and, from walking miles along the mountain paths,
he switched to jogging them Dr. vanZsidy faithfully remained on the Gerson
Therapy in this manner for two years, during which he states for publication
here, “T felt better than ever I had before.”

That beginning experience with the Gerson Therapy for Dr. Joergon van
Zsidy took place over seven years ago. Today he continues with most of the
program and eats only organic vegetables and fruits. No animal protein and no
Modified Therapy for Severely Weakened Cancer Patients 213

grains are included in his diet. He drinks lots of fresh, organic vegetable and
fruit juices and keeps up with taking coffee enemas, sometimes regularly but
mostly irregularly.

To complete his case record Dr. van Zsidy says, “For the past seven years, I
have not felt the resumption of weakness of any kind, and I never come down
with colds, flu, headaches, arthritis, or any other pains. My liver cancer is gone.
Thanks to the Gerson Therapy, I don’t experience the symptoms of illness or
even vague discomforts anymore. Thanks to God and Dr. Max Gerson I’ve
become a healthy person once again.”

THE GERSON PROTOCOL FOR A CANCER PATIENT WHO IS

WEAKENED

Dr. Gerson’s nutrient, diet, and medication protocol for the treatment of a
cancer patient existing in a. severely weakened state, whether or not chemical
pretreatment has been taken, generally is ultraconservative. Modified Gerson
Therapy involves particular guidelines that we give in this chapter. Self-
treatment precautions regarding the Gerson Therapy procedures for this class
of enfeebled patient are announced in the paragraphs that follow. Furthermore,
extra care should be taken by the attending physician to monitor regularly for
electrolyte imbalance, bleeding, dehydration, or other complications related to
cancer, no matter the type of malignancy. A weakened physical condition for
the cancer patient about to engage in Gerson therapeutics is a perilous position
to be in. As repeated below, there are risks directly related to the deprivation of
strength.

Anyone participating in the Gerson Therapy —patient, caregiver, physician,
or other health care professional—must recognize that the detoxification and
salt/water management aspects of the Gerson protocol are extremely powerful.
No overstimulation of the body systems is allowed because the seriously
impaired patient will not be able to mount an appropriate healing if the process
is brought about too quickly or intensely. The patient's variables will include
the body’s overall condition, symptomatology, blood work results, age,
diagnosis, and several other factors.

Please note: All patients with a history of chemical pretreatment should receive the
reduced Gerson protocol, and those in a weakened physical condition with or without
having taken chemotherapy should he given this less intense protocol as well

This chapter presents the appropriate reduced Gerson protocol for the
described type of weakened cancer patients. The program offered is a
modification of the standard Gerson Therapy that was described in chapter 14
and varies somewhat from the modified treatment plan discussed in chapter 15.
214 THE GERSON THERAPY

For each of the medications, their dosages, time intervals, contraindications,
dietary considerations, and follow-up after the first year of therapy are
discussed below beginning with the consumption of juices.

JUICE DRINKING BY THE PATIENT
LINGERING IN A WEAKENED STATE

We must emphasize that juice drinking on the Gerson Therapy is a critical
aspect of the regimen. The juices provide most of the vitamins, minerals,
enzymes, phytochemicals, and other nutrients essential to healing, along with
adequate fluid intake. Drinking fresh-squeezed, organically grown vegetable
and fruit juices allows for greater absorption and utilization of all of the
nutrients found in foods from which the juices are made. Patients who are
victimized by degenerative diseases almost always experience difficulty
digesting and absorbing food. This can be a result of toxicity, malfunction of
the digestive system, a decrease in stomach acid production, or a variety of
other causes. Gastrointestinal debilitation like this is the same reason that many
patients have difficulty digesting and absorbing vitamin and mineral pills or
capsules.

After Dr. Gerson treated a weakened patient—frequently somebody in a
terminal state —it became his goal to find ways of increasing the absorption of
nutrients. He did this in order to bring about steadily increasing physiological
healing and to produce remissions or cures in the otherwise terminal patients.
His clinical experimentation showed that fresh juice from organically grown
raw foods provided the easiest and most effective means of furnishing high-
quality nutrition, and such fresh juice drinking produced the best clinical
results.

The Gerson Institute personnel continue to evaluate the effects of the
recommended juices. They have considered the addition of other juices and
juice products too, and they look for ways to both enhance the healing process
and minimize hardship in the practice of the Gerson Therapy. No one says the
Gerson approach is easy. As yet, the staff members have not found any means
of reducing, substituting, or eliminating any of the juices that have already
been recommended.

Additionally, it must be emphasized that preparing the juices fresh at the
time of consumption is mandatory. This procedure works, which is why the
Gerson Institute is reluctant to make changes. It’s difficult for the Gerson staff
members to justify risking lives for the sake of experimentation when there
already exists a proven protocol for treating and healing degenerative diseases.
Modified Therapy for Severely Weakened Cancer Patients 215

QUESTIONS ABOUT JUICE-DRINKING GUIDELINES

What are the functions of juice in the healing process? Why have certain
juices been chosen? Why are they used in specific ways? For what reasons must
the juices be made fresh? These are only a few of the questions asked of us by
Gerson patients. We answer them in the following manner:

During the course of Dr. Max Gerson’s thirty years of clinical practice (1928
to 1958) his anti-degenerative-disease therapy changed considerably. The
variation occurred in the quantity, volume, and type of juices prescribed. Over
the years, many patients have successfully used nothing more than the single
table of juices and medications published in the sixth edition of Dr. Gerson’s
book, A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases, as a road map to healing (see his
“Tables” and “Combined Dietary Regime” ).1

While most treatment protocols prescribed by Gerson Therapy physicians
will follow the revised guidelines in this book, patients under the care of
experienced Gerson physicians may see their ‘juice prescription’ changed in
response to their blood test results, healing reaction responses, or other signs
and symptoms. Severely damaged or weakened patients often require
alterations or modifications of their medications and juices almost daily during
the first weeks of the treatment.

Those health professionals who advise about the Gerson approach admit
that they do not clearly understand how those very special organic, fresh-
squeezed juices enhance healing, except for the obvious vitamin, mineral,
enzyme, and trace mineral supplementation that they provide. The nutrient
supplementation alone is probably not enough to explain why there is a
difference between juices consumed immediately after preparation and those
consumed several hours later. Surely, oxidation of a quantity of juice that’s
been sitting for an interval of time causes loss of certain vitamins and enzymes.
Oxygen will do that.

There has been much discussion of the enzyme activity in the juices when
they are fresh. The importance of these enzymes in numerous biochemical
functions is well accepted. Yet, as any biology student knows, enzymes are
immediately destroyed on contact with stomach acid. What makes the
difference in healing response between the fresh juice and the hours-old juice?
One possibility is that some of the enzymes present in the fresh juice are
absorbed directly through the mucous membranes in the mouth and
esophagus, before reaching the stomach. This theory is borne out by the
observation that patients fed through a nasogastric or stomach tube do not
respond favorably to the Gerson Therapy.

Another possibility, from the esoteric medical literature which deals with

wa,

human and plant energies, is that there is a form of plant “vital force,” “qi,” or
216 THE GERSON THERAPY

“prana’ present in the juices when freshly made. Some believe that this “vital
force” benefits the patient's vital force. Such juice promotes healing at the
energetic or psychic level rather than at the cellular or biochemical level.

The Gerson Institute possesses little evidence to support any of the as-
sumptions stated above, but its personnel do not wish to rule out any pos-
sibility that gives all of us greater understanding. In addition to the nutritional
supplementation, the juices also serve to flush the kidneys by virtue of their
high liquid content.

So, however the healing process occurs from drinking juice as recommended
by the Gerson Therapy advocates, it is vital to recognize that true physiological
restoration comes as a result of the intake of fresh juices. Doing so must be
consistent. The process has been validated by longterm positive outcomes. All
this gives the Gerson Insitute personnel reason enough to follow Dr. Max
Gerson’s original directives regarding the drinking of juices to overcome cancer
and other degenerative diseases.

THE MANNER OF JUICE DRINKING BY WEAKENED CANCER

PATIENTS

In most situations, it is advisable to start the juice-drinking regimen of a
weakened cancer patient with 4 ounces per dose. Temporarily eliminate the
three carrot-only juices. The juice dosage will depend on the condition of the
patient and his or her ability to tolerate the juices, and the potential side effects
which may result. If the patient can tolerate the smaller amount of juice, juices
may be increased after four to seven days, which typically entails raising the
quantity from 4 ounces to 5 or 6 ounces per dose. Increases must be carefully
monitored, and care must be taken to ensure that the patient continues to
tolerate all juices, without significant nausea or other side effects.

The schedule of juice drinking should follow the guideline offered here.
Each day drink:

1 orange juice

4 green leaf juices

5 apple/carrot juices

3 carrot juices alone

Gruel may be added to any of the juices—up to 50 percent by volume —to
reduce nausea and increase tolerance.
Modified Therapy for Severely Weakened Cancer Patients 217

MEDICATION AND OTHER PROTOCOL CHANGES FOR THE

WEAKENED CANCER PATIENT

A frustrating factor for someone with a growing malignancy is that the same
food calories that support the healthy metabolism of normal cells can be used
by malignant cells hungry for energy. Such a situation tends to lead to
weakness, debilitating weight loss, lack of energy, early fatigue, and absence of
any strength to accomplish even personal tasks such as combing the hair,
cooking a meal, or shopping for food. This is known as cachexia, a general
bodily decline associated with almost any chronic disease. It goes together with
weakness for the cancer patient whether or not chemotherapy or
immunotherapy or radiation therapy has entered the treatment picture.

Why does weakness associated with cachexia occur? One hypothesis is that the
patient, simultaneously with his or her malignancy, additionally

suffers from “hypermetabolism,” a state in which the immune-impaired body

burns up its stores of energy too quickly. A second theory is that the chronically

ill patient cannot manufacture lean body mass normally, although fat tissue is

readily created. The weight gain that such persons might experience is

probably only fat and water weight, not muscle and lean tissue substance.

However, keep in mind that both of these theories have failed their various
testings by leading oncologists even in face of repeated clinical and laboratory
investigations.”

A third likely cause is that the digestive system of the cancer patient is
unable to break down fats and animal proteins (“standard foods’) to their end
product that can be used to feed normal tissues. These foods, partially digested,
cannot nourish the normal body cells. However, tumor tissue thrives on these
“4ntermediate” products. Thus, the patient loses weight while the tumor is fed
and grows. On the other hand, foods supplied by the Gerson Therapy are rich
in nutrients and enzymes that are not only easily digested even by the
damaged digestive system of the chronic disease patient, but the enzymes in
fresh raw foods and juices help to destroy tumor tissue. That is why patients
not only maintain (or gain) weight, but are able to break down tumor tissue.

Staff members and patients who follow the guidelines laid down by the
Gerson Therapy know that the patient's weakness, with or without having
undergone chemotherapy, requires a special altered protocol. For the sick
individual deprived of strength and unnerved by such an experience, listed
below are some alterations from the standard Gerson protocol. Note that
instructions in this chapter, except for some exclusions or dosage deviations,
are quite similar to those directions provided in chapter 15.

Potassium Compound Solution (Liquid)
218 THE GERSON THERAPY

The recommended starting dosage for potassium compound solution
suggested is 1 tsp ten times per day, which represents approximately 500 mg or
12.5 mEq each of potassium (K) acetate, gluconate, and monophosphate. This is
a total K combination of 1.5 grams or 37.5 mEq/ day.

In patients experiencing extreme weakening, no potassium supplementation
should be received for three to five days, or until conditioning improves and
stabilizes. The normal dosage of 10 tsp per day may be cautiously increased to
2 tsp ten times per day after five to seven days. If no adverse side effects are
observed, increase the dosage to 3 and then 4 tsp ten times per day, as the
patient is able to tolerate.

There are contraindications to K compound solution: Patients with a history
of renal insufficiency or generalized kidney dysfunction, gastritis, nausea,
significant bone metastases, or any indication of bleeding problems should be
started with 1 tsp of K ten times per day. Dosage may be slowly increased after
observation of the compound's effects. Anyone with a history of cardiac
insufficiency, myocardial infarction, or congestive heart failure should not
receive potassium until blood laboratory work has been analyzed by a
physician.

Lugol (Potassium Iodide, KI, Half-Strength)

The KI in Lugol is ingested at the rate of one to two drops per day. There are
contraindications to taking Lugol for weakened patients. If the individual has a
history of allergy to iodine, Lugol is not indicated, at least initially; however, it
can be cautiously added after three to five days, one drop to start, then
increasing as tolerance allows.

Weakened patients presenting with hepatic (liver) insufficiency, primary or
metastatic tumor activity in the liver, hepatitis, or hepatic cirrhosis should be
started on one to two drops of Lugol per day, to avoid bleeding or a decrease in
blood platelets. Those patients with bone metastases should also receive
reduced Lugol to avoid excessive bone deterioration and pain. Any patients
known to be affected by heavy metal toxicity should additionally receive doses
of one to two drops per day initially.

Thyroid Hormone

Thyroid hormone is taken in zero to 1'/2-grain doses once per day. But there
are contraindications to thyroid usage similar to those for Lugol. Watch for
signs of hyperthyroidism, including tachycardia, anxiety, insommia, tremors,
and other complications. Reduce dosage levels if any of these signs and
symptoms are present. Also note that transient tachycardia alone is often
indicative for a toxic or flare-up reaction. Patients presenting with a history of
cardiac insufficiency or other cardiac incidents should be started on the lowest
Modified Therapy for Severely Weakened Cancer Patients 219
dosage possible of thyroid daily.

Niacin (Nicotinic Acid), or Vitamin

This vitamin B3 nutrient has a dosage of 50 mg three times per day. Some
contraindications do exist such as for patients who present with hepatic
insufficiency, primary or metastatic tumor activity in the liver, hepatitis, or
hepatic cirrhosis. They should receive a maximum of 100 to 150 mg of niacin
daily. Patients with a medical history of bleeding, ulcers, or gastritis and those
concurrently receiving prednisone, other steroids, or Coumadin should not
receive niacin.

Pancreatin

This pancreatic enzyme from the pig allows for a dosage of three 325- mg
tablets taken four times a day. It’s contraindicated for sarcoma patients.

Crude Liver/Vitamin Biz (Cobalamin) Injection

This combination is taken once daily as an intramuscular injection in a dose
of 100 meg of vitamin Biz with 3 cc of crude liver extract. Other than the patient
attaining excessive levels of vitamin By and occasional allergic reactions, there
is no known contraindication for the crude liver/B,, injection.

Acidol

The gastrointestinal enzyme product known as Acidol (betaine hy-
drochloride and pepsin) is taken in a dose of two capsules daily, three times a
day with meals. There are contraindications to taking this digestive aid
consisting of gastric ulcers, gastritis, severe nausea, intestinal bleeding, or
esophageal problems. Patients with these difficulties and those taking
Coumadin concurrently with Gerson treatment should not receive Acidol.

Coenzyme Qio

While not a vitamin, coenzyme Q:o has vitamin-like properties. It provides
for an initial dose of 90 mg once per day. If no side effects in the form of
tachycardia or arrhythmia arises, on the second day of taking it increase CoQio
to 300 mg daily, and on the third day increase the dose to 600 mg. Remain at
that higher dosage thereafter.

Wobe-Mugos and Megazyme Forte

These gastrointestinal enzymes are used primarily when the patient suffers
from severe, excessive gas. Some reports also indicate that the enzymes may be
helpful in reducing tumor masses.
Modified ' Therapy for Severely Weakened Cancer Patients 225 Laetrile

Laetrile, known generically as amygdalin, is indicated for the treatment of
bone metastases, and it may be useful in the treatment of lung cancers as well.
When laetrile is available, it is used primarily to reduce pain levels, although
this effect requires ten days to two weeks of daily administration for optimum
results. The dosage is 2 grams (5 cc) intravenously once per day. It may be
useful for severely weakened cancer patients who have or have not undergone
chemotherapy. A physician must make that determination.

Brewer's Yeast

This type of food yeast derived from the brewing of beer is not recom-
mended under most circumstances because of the potentially increased risk of
the yeast syndrome (candidiasis) developing or worsening. Also, many people
taking brewer's yeast report extreme abdominal distension and gas.

Castor Oil Treatment

This plant oil is contraindicated in patients who have undergone
chemotherapy pretreatment. In nonchemotreated patients who are much
weakened, castor oil treatment may be applicable after six to nine months on
the Gerson Therapy. Yet it should be taken with great caution, as extremely
toxic side effects can occur from the body’s resulting elimination of prior
chemotherapy residues. Castor oil is a powerful detoxifier, and long-buried
cytotoxicity can come out of the tissues. Such a release may produce severe
healing reactions.

Coffee Enemas

Coffee enemas are standard for cancer patients who are sapped of strength.
The dosage is a 32-ounce enema once or twice per day. In some people, this
dosage will be reduced to half strength by mixing 16 ounces of chamomile tea
with 16 ounces of coffee. The coffee enema dosage may gradually be increased
as needed, but care must be taken not to overstimulate the liver and cause
extremely toxic side effects from the elimination of noxious chemotherapy
residues lodged within the body.

FIRST-YEAR FOLLOW-UP THERAPY FOR THE DEBILITATED

CANCER PATIENT
Follow-up therapy is required on this reduced Gerson protocol for the
debilitated cancer patient. Changes in the medications will be made during the
first year of Gerson treatment. For instance, approximately one month after
discharge from the inpatient treatment center (probably six to nine weeks after
Modified Therapy for Severely Weakened Cancer Patients 221

admission to the Gerson hospital and start of the Gerson Therapy), thyroid,
potassium, and Lugol medications are adjusted. If the patient has been on
extremely reduced levels, these medications may be increased by 25 to 50
percent. Other supplements are generally kept at initial levels.

If the patient was receiving normal levels of the Gerson protocol (e.g., 40 tsp
of potassium and eighteen drops of Lugol), these medication levels are reduced
by approximately 50 percent, assuming the patient is making satisfactory
progress and gaining in strength. If the patient has been receiving normal levels
of medications such as 40 tsp of K and eighteen drops of Lugol, such
medication levels are reduced by approximately 50 percent. The adjusted
medication levels are generally maintained for nine to fourteen months.
Supplemental adjustments are often made based on the diagnostic blood work
and other diagnostic means.

Note that this follow-up protocol differs significantly from the information in Dr.
Gerson s original book “A Cancer 'Therapy.’Patients must now be kept on higher
dosages of the three main medications for longer periods than in Dr. Gerson’s
day. When medications are reduced too rapidly (such as according to the
schedule in A Cancer Therapy), patients often have difficulties and experience a
slowing of recovery or a recurrence of disease.

For prostrate, vulnerable, or exhausted patients who have or have not
undergone chemotherapy before undertaking the Gerson Therapy, following
the instructions in this chapter will ensure health improvement and potential
recovery from disease. The weakened state for almost any individual can be
overcome by accepting the recommendations originally put forth by Max
Gerson, M.D.

References for Chapter Sixteen

1. Gerson, M. A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases. A Summary of 30 Years
of Clinical Experimentation and The Cure of Advanced Cancer by Diet
therapy, 6th edition. Bonita, Calif.: The Gerson Institute, 1999, pp. 223-248.

2. Nixon, D.W; Zanca, J.A. The Cancer Recovery Eating Plan: The Right Foods
to Help Fuel Your Recovery. New York: Times Books, 1994, pp. 23-26.
222 THE GERSON THERAPY

Chapter Seventeen

MODIFIED THERAPY FOR
NONCANCER PATIENTS

A the beginning of a weekend in February 1995, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,

resident Pamela Ptak, now thirty-four years old, drove to her parents’
home in Springfield, Massachusetts, for their regular visit. When she woke up
the next morning in the bed she had occupied as a teenager, she noted that a
large gray spot was stuck in the center of the field of vision of her left eye.
When she stood in front of the mirror and closed her right eye, she could no
longer see her head. It was blocked by the central eye spot, which appeared
dark, warped, rippled, and in a shade of gray. Moreover, this spot in Pamela's
left eye caused much of her color vision to be lost.

Alarmed, she returned to Pittsburgh, depending on her right eye to see while
driving. Once home, she consulted an ophthalmologist who had been
recommended to her by the local hospital in her east Pittsburgh area. The eye
doctor thought that his new patient's problem was central serous retinopathy, a
condition that often disappears by itself. Central serous retinopathy is marked by
acute localized detachment of the neural retina or retinal pigment epithelium in
the region of the macula.

Unfortunately for the patient, this specialist was wrong. Rather, her blocking
eye spot did not go away and stayed with Pamela Ptak until June 1995. During
the ensuing four-month period, the spot’s symptomatic effects had worsened.

After revisiting the same physician, she was put through another diagnostic
procedure called fluorescein angiogram, which showed that multiple spots were
now forming layers on the retinas of both the patient's eyes. The
ophthalmologist observed that tissue behind the retina was “eaten away” and
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 223

pitted. From his viewing scope he saw that a kind of “bird’s nest’ group of
blood vessels had formed, which had hemorrhaged in the center. This graphic
description caused her great uneasiness and moved her toward consulting
another ophthalmologist for a second opinion.

The second eye specialist diagnosed the young woman as suffering from a
different condition—ocular Justoplasmosis, and he urged immediate surgery to
remove the nest of blood vessels. But eye surgery for the correction of her
ocular histoplasmosis held no attraction for the patient.

Ocular histoplasmosis is an acute degenerative infection of the eye resulting
from the inhalation of spores of the fungus Ilistoplasma capsula- tum The
infection, which can become chronic, remains asymptomatic until some
alteration in the retina occurs. This second doctor traced her eye disease to her
work in a highly toxic job at an advertising agency where she was constantly
exposed to spray glues, toxic art materials, lots of deadline pressure, and severe
emotional stress. Pamela Ptak also regularly sprayed her apartment with roach
poison and other pesticides because of infestation by biological pests. One of
them may have been the same fungus causing her disability.

While she was debating whether to undergo the eye operation, a friend
suggested that Pamela look into the Gerson Therapy as an alternative method
of healing. It does work against any degenerative disease, chronic or acute,
including those brought about by pathological microorganisms. Since the
young woman was familiar with the treatment’s concept (she had watched two
friends who had been diagnosed with cancer save their own lives by its
application), she decided to start on Dr. Max Gerson’s healing program herself.
She found it to be no hardship, for a health food supermarket located just down
the street furnished their clientele with organically grown produce at fair
market prices, and it comprised almost all of Pamela's diet.

Thus, for just one month, from the end of June to July 31, 1995, Pamela Ptak
faithfully performed the Gerson Therapy at home, including the taking of two
coffee enemas, one before she left for work in the morning and a second
immediately upon her arriving home in the evening. The juices she made in
quantity and took along with her in thermos bottles for drinking regularly
throughout her workday. She hoped that the Gerson program was working
during the weeks that followed, but, although her vision seemed to become
much less blocked by the gray spot, she was not sure.

On August 1, the patient visited the second retinal surgeon once more to
discuss his suggested eye operation. When the doctor looked at his patient's left
retina, he was truly surprised, but pleased. The spot had shrunk and was so
small it was almost invisible. There was no sign of hemorrhaging. The Gerson
Therapy had so stimulated the woman’s immune system that it had
spontaneously killed off hlistoplasma capsulatum on its own. She needed no
224 THE GERSON THERAPY
antifungal, antibiotic medications and no operation. The spot eventually
stopped blocking her vision, and today she sees just fine.

The therapy took slightly over a month. Pamela Ptak happily reports to us
for publication: “Here is one more condition healed by the Gerson Therapy.”

THE GERSON PROTOCOL FOR NONCANCER PATIENTS WITH

DIFFERENT DISEASES

No single diet/medication protocol for nonmalignant illnesses of different
types exists on the Gerson program simply because each disease shows diverse
dietary origins and variable treatment needs. Still, the standard protocol that
had been offered by Dr. Max Gerson’s therapy does provide a starting point
which this chapter discusses. There are many modifications of diet, juicing, and
medications for the different diseases.

Please be assured that the protocol published here does work, although there
are variables. Variables prevail simply because of (a) the patient’s overall
condition, (b) the results of the sick person's laboratory blood work, (c) his or
her symptomatology, (d) the patient's age, (e) the medical diagnosis, and (f)
mumerous other factors. Yet virtually all types of health problems respond to
the Gerson Therapy.

Beginning below with “addictions,” a few of the more common illnesses
which respond well to a modified Gerson Therapy protocol have their variable
treatment programs described in this chapter. First, however, we provide you
with the general therapeutic program for patients with nonmalignant diseases
to follow. This general therapeutic program is the basic format to follow when
someone is weighed down by any acute or chronic illness. Please assure
yourself or loved ones you are helping that any appropriate modifications
required of specific diseases are incorporated into the general protocol that
follows.

Please note: The use of a full, unmodified protocol of the Gerson Therapy for
noncancerous diseases ordinarily remains inadvisable. While not usually as dangerous
as inappropriate application of the therapy to patients with a chemotherapy lustory,
there are still considerable risks to using the intensive protocol in the presence of some
illnesses.

Appropriate explanations must be given to anyone using the therapy re-
garding the reasoning behind application of the reduced protocol. Otherwise,
patients will sometimes self-medicate with the more aggressive protocol, at the
expense of their safety and long-term recovery outlook.
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 225

THE STANDARD PROTOCOL FOR NONCANCEROUS ILLNESSES

Juices

The regimen for treating a noncancerous illness can begin with the daily
drinking of ten 8-ounce glasses of the juices, eliminating pure carrot juice. If the
patient is in good physical condition, she or he should be able to take the full 8-
ounce portions with no difficulty. However, if this person shows any form of
debilitation, start with smaller quantities of juice consisting typically of 4 or 6
ounces.

As always with the Gerson Therapy, be sure that the patient can tolerate all juices
without significant nausea or other side effects before an increase in the juice quantity
is considered.

The schedule of juice drinking to be maintained by a rather ill but non-
cancerous individual should be:

a. Orange juice
b. Green leaf combination juice
c.  Apple/carrot combination juice

Potassium Compound Solution (Liquid)

The recommended starting dosage for potassium compound solution
suggested is 2 tsp ten times per day, which represents approximately 1 gram
(1,000 mg) or 25 mEq each of potassium (K) acetate, gluconate, and phosphate
(monobasic). This is a total K combination of 3 grams or 75 mEq/day. Most of
the time patients do not require the full 40 tsp of potassium that cancer patients
would require.

There are contraindications to K compound solution: Patients with a history
of renal insufficiency or generalized kidney dysfunction, gastritis, nausea, or
any indication of bleeding problems should be started with 1 tsp ten times per
day. Dosage may be slowly increased with observation of the compound's
effects. Anyone with a history of cardiac insufficiency, myocardial infarction, or
congestive heart failure should not receive potassium until blood laboratory
work has been analyzed by a physician who agrees that K ingestion would be
beneficial.

Lugol (Potassium Iodide KI, Half-Strength)

The KI in Lugol is ingested at the rate of three to six drops per day. There are
contraindications to taking Lugol for certain sick but non- cancerous patients. If
the individual has a history of allergy to iodine, Lugol is not indicated, at least
initially; however, it can be cautiously added after three to five days, one drop
to start, then increasing as tolerance allows.
226 THE GERSON THERAPY

Other ill patients presenting with hepatic (liver) insufficiency, hepatitis, or
hepatic cirrhosis should be started on one to two drops of Lugol per day, to
avoid bleeding or a decrease in blood platelets. Those patients known to be
affected by heavy metal toxicity should additionally receive doses of one to two
drops per day initially.

Thyroid Hormone

Thyroid hormone is taken in a dose of 1 grain once or twice per day.
Typically, patients with nonmalignant diseases do not possess as serious a
thyroid deficiency as cancer patients. In some cases, the Gerson-trained health
professionals have found it beneficial for patients to start on up to
5 grains of thyroid hormone for only three to five days, rather than the
fourteen days commonly prescribed for those people with malignancies.

Contraindications to thyroid usage are similar to those for Lugol. Watch for
signs of hyperthyroidism, including tachycardia, anxiety, insomnia, tremors,
and others. Reduce dosage levels if any of these signs and symptoms are
present. Also note that transient tachycardia alone is often indicative for a toxic
or flare-up reaction. Patients presenting with a history of cardiac insufficiency
or other cardiac incidents should be started on a maximum dosage of 2 grains
of thyroid daily.

Niacin (Vitamin B3)

This vitamin B3 nutrient has a dosage of 50 mg three times per day. Some
contraindications do exist, such as for patients who present with hepatic
insufficiency, hepatitis, or hepatic cirrhosis. These liver-impaired people should
receive a maximum of only 100 to 150 mg of niacin daily. Patients with a
medical history of bleeding, ulcers, or gastritis, and those who are concurrently
receiving prednisone, other steroids, or Coumadin should not receive niacin.

Pancreatin

This pancreatic enzyme from the pig allows for a dosage of three 325- mg
tablets taken four times a day. According to Dr. Gerson, pancreatin is
contraindicated for sarcoma patients.

Crude Liver/Bi2 Injection

Taken once daily as an intramuscular injection of 3 cc of crude liver extract,
added to the extract in the same syringe is 0.05 ce of vitamin Bi: to make up a
normal 100-mcg dose. Other than excessive levels of vitamin Biz, and occasional
allergic reactions, there is no known contraindication for the crude liver/Bi2
injection.

Acidol
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 227

The gastrointestinal enzyme product known as Acidol (betaine hydro-
chloride and pepsin), is taken in a dose of two capsules daily, three times a day
with meals. There are contraindications to this digestive aid, including gastric
ulcers, gastritis, severe nausea, intestinal bleeding, or esophageal problems.
Patients with these difficulties and those taking Coumadin concurrently with
Gerson treatment should not receive Acidol.

Coenzyme Qio

While not a vitamin, coenzyme Qy has vitamin-like properties. It provides
for an initial dose of 90 mg once per day. If no side effects in the form of
tachycardia or arrhythmia arise, on the second day of taking it increase CoQ)
to 300 mg daily, and on the third day increase the dose to 600 mg. Remain at
that higher dosage thereafter.

Wobe-Mugos and Megazyme Forte

These two groups of gastrointestinal enzymes are indicated primarily when
the patient suffers from severe, excessive gas. Some reports also indicate that
the enzymes may be helpful in reducing tumor masses.

Laetrile

Laetrile, known generically as amygdalin, is not indicated for the treatment
of conditions other than cancer.

Brewer's Yeast

This type of food yeast, derived from the brewing of beer, is not recom-
mended under most circumstances because of the potentially increased risk of
the yeast syndrome (candidiasis) developing or worsening. Also, many people
taking brewer's yeast report extreme abdominal distention and gas.

Castor Oil Treatment

This plant oil, if used at all, usually is administered one or two times a week.
It should be taken with great caution as castor oil is a powerful detoxifier, and
long-buried toxins can come out of the tissues. Such a release may produce
severe healing reactions.

Coffee Enemas

Coffee enemas are standardly taken by ill patients who are following the
Gerson Therapy in a 32-ounce enema once or twice per day, and the enemas
may be increased in number up to five a day. Remember that coffee enemas
tend to stimulate the liver and can cause toxic side effects from the elimination
of some long-retained noxious residues lodged within the body’s cells.
228 THE GERSON THERAPY

FIRST-YEAR FOLLOW-UP THERAPY FOR THE DEBILITATED
CANCER PATIENT

Follow-up therapy is required on this reduced Gerson protocol for the
person who suffers from an illness other than cancer. Changes in the med-
ications will be made during the first year of Gerson treatment. For instance,
approximately one month after discharge from the inpatient treatment center
(probably six to nine weeks after admission to the Gerson hospital and start of
the Gerson Therapy), thyroid hormone, potassium, and Lugol medications, if at
normal levels, are adjusted downward. Other supplements are generally kept
at initial levels. Supplemental adjustments are often made based on diagnostic
laboratory blood examinations and other means of diagnosis.

Note that this follow-up protocol differs significantly from the information
in “A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases.” Patients must now be kept on
higher dosages of the three main medications for longer periods than in Dr.
Gerson’s day. When medications are reduced too rapidly (such as according to
the schedule published in A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases), patients often
experience difficulties and go through a slowing of recovery or a recurrence of
disease.

Nevertheless, almost any nonmalignant health problem will benefit from
being treated with the Gerson Therapy. At the beginning of this book we cite at
least fifty-two verified diseases that respond exceedingly well to the Gerson
treatment program We have witnessed their improvement, reversal, or
outright cure.

SOME NON CANCEROUS ILLNESSES REVERSED BY THE GERSON
THERAPY

Here are eighteen examples from the vast number of acute or chronic
degenerative health problems that almost anyone can eliminate by following
the modified Gerson approach to healing (discussed above) and by living the
pristine lifestyle originally recommended in the book by Max Gerson, M_D.: (1)
addictions of almost all types, (2) atherosclerosis, (3) chronic fatigue syndrome,
(4) reversible colostomy, (5) diabetes types I and IL, (6) a variety of genetic
disorders, (7) emphysema, (8) heart disease and vascular disease, (9) hepatitis
A, B, and C, (10) kidney disease, (11) heavy metal toxicity, (12) multiple
sclerosis, (13) osteoarthritis, (14) osteoporosis, (15) steroid treatment, (16)
systemic lupus erythematosus, (17) rheumatoid arthritis, and (18) ulcerative
colitis.

In accordance with the efficacy of the Gerson approach to treatment, we
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 229

offer below some commentary on a tiny sampling of these ills. All are able to be
corrected permanently using modifications of the Gerson protocol.

ADDICTIONS

Addictions may be reversed or eliminated entirely by the habituated
individual by adapting the Gerson program. The addictions most readily
responding to some change in the standard Gerson approach are:

Codeine, Morphine, Nicotine, Amphetamines,

Sedatives/Hypnotics

Those unfortunate people seeking treatment for these enslavements should
be regarded as types of chemotherapy patients, and the addictive drugs in
question must be curtailed over a three- to ten-day period. Otherwise, if the
treatment is too aggressive, extremely heavy reactions such as diarrhea and an
inability to eat and drink may result. There will also be the possible
complications involving electrolyte imbalance. For those cases in which the
addictive drugs were originally prescribed as medical relief for pain control,
placebos may be required in the early stages of addiction treatment.

Heroin, Cocaine

Based on a limited number of patients treated with the Gerson Therapy, our
experience is that withdrawal symptoms are almost absent by means of
applying the full, intensive Gerson treatment plan. No program modifications
are required. However, we cannot rule out the risk of the severe reactions
warned about in the narcotic/sedative-hypnotic/amphetamine protocol
described immediately above, particularly given the likelihood of multiple
drug abuse. These addicts must be watched carefully for reactions, and
appropriate interventions by supervising health professionals must be given
when necessary.

Alcohol

The Gerson Therapy has not often been employed for chronic alcoholism,
but we believe that alcoholics could readily be treated with the
narcotic /sedative-hypnotic/amphetamine addiction protocol described above.
Liver function must be watched carefully, and the warnings that apply
regarding hepatic insufficiency or weakness would be appropriately applied to
these unhappy people.

Nicotine

No special modification to the Gerson protocol is required for overcoming
nicotine addiction. Some smokers may temporarily call for mechanical props
230 THE GERSON THERAPY
such as something to put into the mouth or hold in the hands. These props may
suffice to replace the physical activity associated with smoking. Niacin is a
good adjunctive nutrient to take as a food supplement if there are no
contraindicating factors to its use. Some patients report that niacin provides a
similar effect to nicotine. (Niacin’s actual chemical component is, after all,
nicotinic acid.) In most cases, nicotine addiction may be eliminated without any
withdrawal symptoms appearing for the smoker engaging in the Gerson
Therapy.

This treatment for a smoker's habituation or other addictions does work,
although some more generalized explanation might be offered for further
clarification.

Further General Information about Drug
Addiction

Unquestionably, the first thought that comes to mind when we think about
drug addiction is what happens on the street, especially in the inner cities.
Surely in the last two decades, the use of street or illegal drugs has reached
frightening levels; but there are other, possibly even more serious drug
addictions for which we have a suggested treatment already.

To clarify: an extremely common addiction is that to alcohol—a legal drug.
Some 12 million Americans are known to be confirmed alcoholics and an
untold number of undeclared ones exist as well.

Another publicly shared and accepted addiction is the use of another legal
drug: coffee drinking. Starbucks Coffee Shops have built themselves into a
multi-billion-dollar business, a major franchise operation based on this
addiction to coffee. Worldwide, the public has been fooled into believing that
drinking this muddy, dark-colored beverage is diversional, nutritional,
pleasurable, harmless, and socially acceptable, while in reality it has none of
these attributes. Rather, coffee drinking is a temporary brain excitant which
brings on early fatigue; a hypoglycemic producer, it forces excesses of insulin
into the bloodstream; a deteriorator of arteries, especially those already
advanced toward blood vessel hardening from atherosclerosis, it blocks blood
flow; a potential producer of birth defects, one can only conjecture as to the
mumber of babies who have paid the price of their mothers’ addiction. As for
the mothers, coffee drinking is believed by many in the holistic medical
movement to be the possible source of breast cancer.

Numerous drugs are used for stimulants; others are considered to be
recreational. In view of the terrible damage they do, the recreational term is
unquestionably criminally misleading.

Drugs are also used extensively in medical practice for pain relief. And here
we encounter a delicate line of demarcation between use and becoming
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 231

addicted to opioids (morphine is common). The prescribed opioids are taken
for two reasons: painkilling and as an offshoot, psychological addiction. At this
point, therefore, we need some definitions when speaking of prescribed drugs.

Tolerance indicates that increasingly heavier dosages have to be used since
the body systems do become accustomed to the drug. And tolerance is a
contrasting term to plrysical dependence, which indicates that withdrawal
symptoms occur if the drug substance is suddenly withdrawn. But addiction is
considered present when, in addition to tolerance and dependence, psychological
dependence is also present, or the product is compulsively used for nonmedical
purposes.

We believe that a number of addictions, including alcohol and cigarettes,
stem from a basic deficiency. The habituated person is aware that he is craving
something, often actually nutrients, and is not really functioning at his best
level. When he consumes alcohol, cigarettes, or coffee, he feels either calmer or
stimulated to increased physical or mental achievement. When such a person
then experiments with heavier drugs, street drugs, amphetamines, marijuana,
and many more, he is easily “hooked” and cannot stop.

One of the main reasons for this situation of becoming hooked is that the
underlying deficiency has not been solved and the nutrient intake of live
enzymes, vitamins, and minerals remains inadequate. Worse, an alcoholic may
stop eating in favor of drinking and become severely deficient in nutrients. A
person addicted to cigarettes will smoke instead of eating a nutritious meal,
especially when under stress.

The Gerson Therapy and Drug Addiction

In addition to the protocol we furnished earlier for specific forms of drug
addiction, we have some other thoughts about Dr. Max Gerson’s procedures.
The Gerson Therapy has produced some remarkable results in overcoming
addictions, even to cocaine and heroin. When an addicted patient is given
thirteen glasses of freshly pressed vegetable and fruit
juices to drink, his basic craving is satisfied with optimum nutrition, and to his
own surprise, he no longer craves the drug.

Yes, withdrawal may occur. When the withdrawal symptoms set in, at a
time when the body tissues begin to release the accumulated drugs from the
cells into the bloodstream, a coffee enema clears the toxicity. The nights remain
the only problem for the first few days. At night, no juices are served and the
patient coming off his or her drug addiction sleeps so that no detoxifying
enemas are taking place.

During those first nights of coming off their addictions, the patients tend to
suffer from heavy nightmares and wake up around 1:00 or 2:00 AM. They
should then swallow some fruit or juice and get up to take an enema. This
232 THE GERSON THERAPY

relieves the toxicity and possible craving so that the patient can go back to
sleep. The nighttime problem also clears after less than a week. We have seen
excellent results in overcoming addictions, even the heaviest ones involving not
one but multiple drugs.

One young man (see the story of Rob in chapter 7) had been into various
heavy drugs and on a particular day he was showing the symptoms. In his
middle thirties, he was lying on the floor, too weak to get up, having lost some
45 pounds and feeling ready to die. His mother saved him by providing the
foods and juices as well as the enemas of the Gerson Therapy. In a few months,
the son gained back 35 pounds and felt like his former self. He had suffered
virtually no withdrawal problems even at the start of the treatment, and
returned to normal life and activity.

We see that the Gerson Therapy can also achieve prompt and dramatic
results in smokers and alcoholics. (See Beata Bishop’s book A Time to Heal.)?
One of the Gerson Therapy patients, another young man who is now thirty-
four years old and addicted to cocaine (supposedly the most difficult drug
addiction to overcome), came to a Gerson hospital for treatment. He reported
that all of his close friends had died from cocaine use.

This fellow admitted that he was having lung troubles as a result of street
drug use and would surely die within two months if the Gerson Therapy was
unable to help him. He was also a heavy smoker. After becoming a Gerson
patient, the man went through nightmares similar to those we had observed in
others. These were relieved with a nighttime coffee enema; thus, he was off the
need for drugs, and smoking cigarettes, within a week.

Studies have been completed suggesting that many people are addicted to
simple foods to which they are actually allergic. In his book Diet, Crime and
Delinquency, Alexander Schauss, Ph.D., points out that violent young criminals
between ages eighteen and twenty-one are often addicted to sugar and/or
heavy milk consumption to which they are actually allergic. Dr. Schauss
reported that when the offending substances were withdrawn and vitamins
and minerals along with an appropriate diet were substituted, these violent
criminals became calm and reasonable.

Of course the Gerson Therapy is intentionally devoid of foods that tend to
cause allergies in some people. The organic vegetarian diet, free of pesticides
and chemical additives, achieves the purpose of overcoming allergies and
allergic reactions.

ATHEROSCLEROSIS

Atherosclerosis (arteriosclerosis), or hardening of the arteries, usually
responds exceedingly well to the Gerson protocol. This condition is eliminated
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 233

by the antiblocking nutrition present in pure, whole vegetarian foods and the
detoxification procedures originating in the standard Gerson protocol.

CHRONIC FATIGUE SYNDROME

People suffering from the series of symptoms identified as chronic fatigue
and immune dysfunction syndrome (CFIDS) or chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS)
get along just fine on the Gerson program, but they should see significant
improvement after a short time, with recovery after about nine months. These
Gerson treatment participants are allowed to have the full thirteen glasses of
juice daily if desired.

CFS patients commonly feel worse after taking enemas in the early stages of
treatment because of toxicity escaping from their body cells. Two enemas daily
are normally suggested initially, working up to four.

Too many enemas can trigger strong adverse reactions. And patients with
chronic fatigue syndrome tend to experience extremely strong emotional
responses, such as depression and crying, during and between reaction periods.
From a psychological perspective, they often present difficulties in
management.

REVERSIBLE COLOSTOMY

Patients with colostomies that are reversible typically receive two combined
coffee and chamomile tea enemas per day by use of an irrigation kit. Gerson
personnel give instructions for using this kit.

For the colostomy patient, coffee enemas can be mixed 50/50 with
chamomile tea, to reduce the potential of cramping and spasms. The volume of
juices, particularly the green juice, is often lowered to just 4 ounces. Green
juices are not absorbed well and will pass through the gastrointestinal tract
rather quickly.

DIABETES, TYPES 1 AND 2

The term diabetes refers to a set of metabolic disorders that cause hy-
perglycemia, or high blood sugar. The two primary reasons for blood sugar to
elevate correspond to the two main kinds of diabetes: juvenile, or type 1,
diabetes, and adult-onset, or type 2, diabetes. The body puts insulin into service
in several ways; one of them involves converting sugars into energy individual
cells can utilize to control their blood sugar levels. The absence or impairment
of insulin release brings about serious health problems.

Type 1 diabetes is caused by an insulin absence or deficiency, usually
234 THE GERSON THERAPY

coming from damage to the islets of Langerhans, which are the cells located on
the pancreas for producing insulin. While the cause of type 1 diabetes is not
fully understood, many factors, such as genetic predisposition and viral
infection, may play roles. One theory is that, combined with other factors,
childhood bouts with pancreatitis are responsible for damaging those islet cells
of the pancreas responsible for insulin production. Immune system malfunction
seems to also play a role due to islet cell antibodies that are universally found
in type 1 diabetic patients. Again, this may be tied to a present or past viral
infection. Patients are usually diagnosed with the disease, enter a short
remission period, but then lose islet cell function for life.

Type 1 diabetes generally occurs in children and usually has no relation to a
patient's weight. Roughly 8 percent of diabetes cases in the United States are of
this kind, with somewhat increased percentages occurring in Europe.
Symptoms of type 1 diabetes include increased urination and thirst due to
dehydration. Blurred vision and weight loss (despite normal appetite) are also
common. Symptoms due to acute insulin deficiency include the above health
difficulties as well as nausea, vomiting, and insulin shock.4

Type 2 diabetes, in contrast to type 1, is not primarily a result of insulin
deficiency, but rather the body’s inability to properly use the insulin produced.
In such patients, the islet cells function adequately, but only a small amount of
insulin actually is used by the cells to produce energy. Again, the cause of this
problem is unclear; one theory that seems to be supported by clinically
observing the Gerson Therapy working in diabetic patients is that insulin
receptors on individual cells can often become obstructed by cholesterol. Other
possible causes include genetic predisposition.’

Type 2 diabetic patients are quite frequently forty years of age or older and
overweight. Often accompanying this diabetic type are high blood pressure and
high blood cholesterol, symptoms found frequently with obesity. The disease’s
symptoms are often more difficult to spot with type 2 patients, although
increased thirst and urine output are sometimes noted. Chronic skin infections
and reduced circulation to the extremities can also be present.°

Conventional Treatment and Potential
Complications of Diabetes

Management depends on the type of diabetes affecting an individual. Type 1
diabetes is always managed by a combination of diet and insulin injection.
Insulin regimens, designed to supply a continuous though fluctuating supply
of insulin to the body, are self-administered by the patient. Diet management,
as recommended by the American Diabetes Association, usually suggests that
protein intake constitute 10 to 20 percent of caloric intake, with fat no more
than that same percentage for fats and oils. The remaining percentage is to be
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 235

balanced among complex carbohydrates and other products, corresponding to
the insulin intake of the patient.

This same diet regimen applies for type 2 patients, although weight loss also
becomes a frequent goal. There are a series of noninsulin drugs on the market
as well. Their functions range from increasing insulin production in the islet
cells to slowing carbohydrate absorption. Type 2 patients will, on some
occasions, also self-administer insulin injections.

Diabetes management is almost always geared toward long-term symptom
control. Frequently, diet control is a difficult balancing act as the patient has to
factor activity levels, different food products, metabolic needs, potential insulin
needs, and other health factors into day-to-day treatment.

Despite conventional medical treatment methods, a number of com-
plications still result, which include eye and vision problems such as cataract
development, retinal damage, and glaucoma. Kidney problems also strike
diabetics frequently; the risk of kidney disease in some form is 15 to 20 percent
in type 2 patients and is double that percentage in type 1 diabetics.”

Diabetes and the Gerson Therapy

Type 1 diabetic patients, when treated with the Gerson Therapy, often notice
a great reduction in their insulin requirements, though many will remain
permanently dependent on insulin. When islet of Langerhans cells are
destroyed, the body, even in the best of health, cannot regenerate them. If the
cells are only damaged, there is some chance that the body, aided by the Gerson
protocol, can heal and restore their function.

Additionally, in patients presenting diabetes-associated degenerative
changes such as reduced vision, kidney damage, or circulation problems, the
therapy is often effective in reversing deterioration. Type 1 diabetes patients do,
however, need to indefinitely continue a menu plan very close to the Gerson
diet to maintain the best health.

Type 2 diabetes is far more easily corrected. Patients treated with the Gerson
protocol are often able to eliminate the need for insulin management. As
mentioned previously, one potential cause of type 2 diabetes is a clogging effect
on the insulin receptors due to cholesterol deposits. Because the Gerson diet is
very low in fat and contains no cholesterol, it is highly effective in rapidly
reducing cholesterol. We hold that Dr. Gerson’s diet is able to quickly reverse
this clogging problem, allowing cell receptors to use insulin. Many Gerson
Insitute personnel have observed patients that are able to reduce their insulin
dependence almost immediately when following the Gerson protocol.

Diabetic patients pursuing the Gerson Therapy in an inpatient setting will
receive an altered version of the Gerson diet with a reduction in sugar intake.
Patients frequently work their way back toward the standard Gerson protocol
236 THE GERSON THERAPY

as their bodies respond to the therapy and begin to heal After several weeks,
we have observed cases of type 2 diabetes that are able to resume the full
Gerson protocol, including full amounts of the apple/carrot juices that would
otherwise have caused severe problems in a diabetic.

Diabetes can be further complicated by many of the other problems it brings
to the body, most notably kidney damage. While the Gerson Therapy is able to
reverse a good deal of such damage, when the kidneys are past a certain
point — generally 20 percent or less of normal function — this treatment program
is no longer effective. The same holds true for those people who are undergoing
or about to start dialysis, or for those who have already undergone kidney
transplant surgery.

A Summary of the Gerson Therapy Application
for Diabetics

Type 2 diabetes can often be dramatically improved, and in some cases
overcome, using the Gerson Therapy. Type 1 diabetes patients will often see a
stabilizing effect in some cases with reversal of kidney damage and retinal
damage. Hypertension is often eliminated. Type 1 patients are sometimes able
to discontinue insulin completely, but this is not a common outcome. Glucose
levels in the blood do require careful monitoring.

In consuming juices and following the diet, certain modifications are made
to the Gerson program. Apple juice is eliminated; grapefruit juice replaces
orange; the apple/carrot juice is partly replaced with green juice, depending on
insulin intake. Raw vegetables replace fruits for snacking. All honey, maple
syrup, brown sugar, and other sweeteners are eliminated. If glucose can be
stabilized, one or two pieces of fruit per day may be added to the diet. Melons
are preferred.

In taking the Gerson-recommended medications, thyroid hormone is
reduced to 1 or 1 1/2 grains per day. Lugol is reduced to three drops daily.
Potassium (K) is limited to 1 tsp per glass, except in cases of severe edema
where K may be increased to 2 tsp per glass. During healing reactions, the
individual's need for insulin may temporarily increase. Over time, the re-
quirement for insulin supplementation is usually completely eliminated in type
2 diabetes. Type 1 patients often continue to need some supplementation, but
other degenerative processes are usually arrested.

GENETIC DISORDERS

Genetic disorders generally do not respond to the Gerson Therapy, but
symptoms of genetic weakness can be improved. One case of cystic fibrosis
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 237

showed significant improvement while the patient followed the Gerson
program.

Emphysema

Positive responses by emphysema patients have been observed when they
faithfully adhered to the Gerson protocol. Lung capacity can be increased and
related symptoms controlled.

Heart Disease and Vascular Disease

High blood pressure responds exceptionally well to the Gerson Therapy. In
fact, improvements are so great that the companions accompanying a heart
patient should be screened for antihypertensive effects, since we have observed
hypotension in both patients and companions following administration of the
Gerson diet alone. Antihypertensive drugs should be slowly decreased starting
the third to fifth day of treatment. Malignant high blood pressure can take
longer to respond to the treatment.

Heart disease does respond well to the Gerson program, and here is an
illustration: In October 1990, a man whom we'll identify as Frank Winslow
checked into the Gerson Therapy hospital in Tijuana, Mexico, with a multitude
of health problems. He was extremely obese, weighing 303 pounds. Now forty-
six years of age, Frank had already suffered a massive heart attack at age thirty-
eight, and it had left him not only with heart damage, but with high blood
pressure.

Frank Winslow also suffered from gout and was taking standard antigout
medication. If he stopped taking it for only one day, he would have a severe
gouty attack. He also had intractable diabetes. Even with his taking medication
and insulin, his blood sugar ran between 240 and 400 mg/dL (where normal is
below 120).

So Frank was given the Gerson Therapy, modified somewhat because of his
high blood pressure and diabetes. Usually, as you may know by now, the
Gerson juicing program includes thirteen glasses of fruit and vegetable juices:
one 8-ounce glass (225 grams) of orange juice, about five glasses containing
apples and carrots in approximately a 35 to 65 percent proportion, 1/3 apples
to 2/3 carrots), three glasses of carrot juice given with two capsules of liver
powder each, and four glasses of juice made with various salad greens, also
containing one small apple each. In order to decrease his glucose intake
somewhat, he was given not orange juice but grapefruit juice. And Frank’s
other juices contained fewer apples. He was also given more green juices in the
place of some of the carrot juice.

Making an additional dietary adjustment which is usually done for dia-
betics, this patient was not furnished with a fruit plate to eat in his room, as the
238 THE GERSON THERAPY

other patients ordinarily receive. Instead, Frank was served a plate of raw
vegetables: cut-up carrot sticks, green pepper strips, celery sticks, little
cauliflower heads, tomatoes-—so that he would have something to “nibble” in
case he was hungry. Outside of that, he could eat three full Gerson Therapy
meals at regular mealtimes. They included all organic vegetarian foods, freshly
prepared without any salt or fats, no frozen or canned foods, and very limited
herbal spices.

Between his three meals and thirteen glasses of juice, plus his raw vegetable
plate daily, Frank was never hungry even for one moment. But he did get rid of
a pound a day for over two and a half months! Of course the man was also
administered the other components of the Gerson Therapy:

2 tsp of potassium compound in each glass of juice, along with a little thyroid,
Lugol's solution (iodine), and digestive enzymes.

Frank was taken off his antigout medication from the first day and never
had another gout attack! He was also receiving the regular coffee enemas of the
Gerson Therapy and an intramuscular injection of 3 cc of crude liver extract
which contained 0.1 cc of vitamin Bip daily. Exceptionally (this next medication
is not given to nondiabetic patients), he also received three times daily 200 mcg
of chromium picolinate, a glucose tolerance factor.

Meantime, Frank’s blood pressure came down (without salt and fat, the
Gerson Therapy usually produces reduction of blood pressure within a few
days); therefore, his blood pressure medication was lowered.

Within five weeks, not only had Frank Winslow lost 35 pounds, but his
blood sugar was a normal 105 (from a high of 240) without his receiving any
medication or insulin. Fie continued to lose 1 pound a day until he was a
reasonably normal 205 pounds (at a height in his stocking feet of 6 feet 2 inches
or 190 cm). All this time, consuming the right foods, the patient was able to eat
according to his appetite’s needs without being hungry at any time.

One very important aspect of Dr. Max Gerson’s therapy is the coffee enema.
When a patient of this diabetic type with other complications of illness is losing
weight rapidly, he is also metabolizing many of the toxins that are stored in the
fatty tissue. In other words, when the fat dissolves, the chemicals contained in
the fatty tissue go into the general blood circulation and poison the patient if
one does not intensively detoxify. The coffee enemas help to open the bile ducts
in the liver and allow the toxins to be eliminated through the bowel. (See full
details of the Gerson Therapy procedure in our separate chapters about the
juices, food preparation, and coffee enemas.)

There are several interesting facts in this case that deserve attention. On the
one hand, it became obvious to the Tijuana hospital’s staff of physicians that
Frank was a typical case of low thyroid function, in addition to his other
problems. He was extremely overweight and had already suffered one severe
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 239

heart attack plus diabetes, all of which relate to his having a low thyroid
function. Also, both of his sons, aged fourteen and seventeen, suffered from
allergies and asthma, respectively. These are also signs of low thyroid function
(often hereditary) and immune deficiency. The boys had them too.

Still more astonishing in this family situation is the fact that Frank’s father,
now about seventy-six years old, had been a patient on the Gerson Therapy
some seven years earlier, suffering from advanced pancreatic cancer. His
doctors had given him a “hopeless” prognosis, saying that he had perhaps
three to six months to live. He came to the Gerson Therapy hospital facility in
Tijuana, stayed faithfully on the Gerson Therapy, and recovered completely. It
is now over eight years since the senior Mr. Winslow's recovery, and the man
remains well today. He too had already suffered three heart attacks prior to his
diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. Today, as well, he remains free of heart disease,
is active and enjoying life.

There is something to be learned by studying this unique family situation.
We see here another member of the Winslow family with low thyroid function,
suffering heart attacks and eventually cancer. Even though the son watched
this dramatic recovery in his father, he allowed himself to become so seriously
ill that he was close to death before presenting himself for the treatment which
had already saved his father’s life!

An important factor in the Gerson Therapy for heart disease is the use of
thyroid medication to increase metabolism, burn off fats, and use up
cholesterol. Obviously, thyroid hormone must be started at a low level in order
not to overtax the damaged heart. Second, food supplementation with flaxseed
oil helps to dissolve fat and cholesterol deposits in the arteries and increase the
ability of the blood to carry oxygen. Also of great importance is the use of
potassium, which helps in enzyme function (also to dissolve plaque) and keeps
the blood from coagulating excessively; thus, potassium reduces the danger of
clots forming and causing heart attacks and/or strokes.

Dr. Gerson was aware early in the development of his therapy of the ex-
treme importance of potassium in treating all chronic disease. He stated that, in
his opinion, the beginning of all chronic degenerative disease is the loss of
potassium from the cell and the invasion of sodium (which we have referred to
as tissue damage syndrome). In the area of heart disease, this opinion about tissue
damage syndrome was later stated by Professor Demetrio Sodi-Pallares of the
Mexico City University Medical School. He wrote more than twelve books and
over 300 articles on his treatment of heart disease.

Dr. Sodi-Pallares also states that, in his opinion, heart disease is not a
disorder of the heart but a disease of the body—particularly the loss of
potassium and excess sodium. He too, in his treatment of heart disease patients,
gives only a low-sodium and high-potassium diet. It was much after his
240 THE GERSON THERAPY

original work with heart disease and many publications that he became aware
of Dr. Gerson’s work and similar philosophy. Only Dr. Gerson applied his low-
sodium, high-potassium diet to all chronic diseases, with the same excellent
results. Low sodium and high potassium work well in combination against all
kinds of illnesses.

Of course, the Gerson Therapy also includes many other items and
procedures, such as intensive nutritional therapy with many freshly prepared
juices, digestive enzymes, flax oil, and the detoxifying coffee enemas. In
arteriosclerosis and heart disease, Dr. Gerson achieved not only improvement
but long-term survival. Contrary to the belief and teaching of orthodox
medicine, in the Gerson patient arterial plaque and invasion is reversible so that
the artery walls become clear of plaque again.

One other patient is Dr. Gerson’s longtime friend, Professor Henry Schaefer-
Simmern of New York City. This patient, in his mid-forties, a heavy smoker,
had suffered several heart attacks within a few days of each other. He was
barely alive with little blood circulation, as evidenced by his blue lips. Professor
Schaefer-Simmern was put on the Gerson Therapy in the late 1940s and
remained alive and active into his middle eighties.

Nearly all additional acute or chronic degenerative diseases may find
permanent correction by the patient's application of a modified Gerson
Therapy.

Hepatitis A, B, AnD C

We have observed apparent full remission and restoration of liver function
using the Gerson protocol. Treatment is identical to that of almost any cancer
chemotherapy patient. Liver enzymes should be carefully watched.

KIDNEY DISEASE

Owing to the low-protein diet offered in the Gerson protocol, kidney disease
can be controlled and any remaining kidney function of not less than 15 percent
can be maximized. Once patients have been started on dialysis, they cannot be
accepted for treatment with the Gerson Therapy. Since kidneys won't be fully
restored in most cases, kidney patients must remain for the rest of their lives on
the Gerson Therapy.

METALLIC TOXICITY

Lugol’s solution should be reduced to one or two drops per day when
metallic toxicity is being conquered. The detoxification process should be
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 241

allowed to occur slowly. The modified Gerson regimen for chemotherapy
patients in fair physical condition is normally used to overcome metallic
toxicity.

MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS

The Gerson Therapy has obtained excellent results in cases of MS. With the
proper nutrition and detoxification, the body is able to clear the damaged
myelin sheaths, which insulate the nerves so that they can carry electrical
messages to the brain and back. Clearing the damaged “insulation” may cause a
temporary worsening of the symptoms, frightening the Gerson patient.
However, if one persists and stays with the treatment, the body will restore and
heal these sheaths, resulting in ultimate full recovery.

Warning: MS is “assumed” to be an “auto-immume” disease. Namely, it is felt
that the body’s own immune system is destroying the myelin sheaths. With that
assumption and with no other treatment choice, orthodox medicine often treats
victims of MS with immune-suppressants, such as cancer chemotherapy. After
such treatments, the Gerson Therapy is not easily effective. Also, such patients
are often treated for long periods of time with prednisone. This, too, holds back
recovery by the Gerson Therapy.

OSTEOARTHRITIS

More commonly occurring and less quickly debilitating than rheumatoid
arthritis, osteoarthritis is usually found in older people. It's due to a slowly
deteriorating process in the joints, and it arises from the same underlying
damage caused by excess proteins which the body is unable to assimilate and
the kidneys cannot excrete. However, osteoarthritis is not accompanied by the
inflammatory process, so it’s slow to cause joint damage and destruction. The
disease is fairly common to observe as hard, bony lumps in the index finger, the
little finger, or in almost any of the joints in the hands and toes. Osteoarthritis
eventually lodges in the larger joints as well.

Both types of arthritis—osteo- and rheumatoid—are theorized to be
genetically related. There is good reason to support this theory, since in either
case we have to remember that the body is unable to handle the overload of
animal proteins. This would presume a weakened pancreas, unable to generate
the necessary proteolytic enzymes. The tendency to a weak pancreas could well
be inherited.

But there is another point to consider. When a disease runs in the family, we
have to remember that the family members are likely to eat the same foods. Not
242 THE GERSON THERAPY

only that, but the daughters will again eat the foods they have learned to
prepare from their mothers. In this way, the same type of diet will be carried on
through the family and into the next generation.

At the Gerson Institute, we had an interesting illustration of this situation. A
vivacious woman named Lillian Stomatis, aged about fifty-five, arrived at the
Gerson Therapy hospital to find relief for her rheumatoid arthritis. Her right
knee was very swollen and so painful that she was unable to help herself. In
order to manage at the hospital, she brought her daughter Rosalie along to help
her walk to the bathroom, dress, and perform other personal tasks.

The daughter, an attractive young woman, was twenty-eight years old and
already clearly showed the beginning symptoms of arthritis. Still more
unfortunate, Rosalie had brought along her own daughter, a pretty little girl in
pigtails, aged five, who already had the first symptoms of arthritis! So we see
that the degenerative changes of arthritis set in earlier and earlier in each
generation.

The older people still have somewhat better reserves and are less damaged
by the toxins in the air, water, soil, and daily food and newer drugs. The
younger people are getting more and more used to taking drugs for pain,
discomfort, sleeplessness, low energy, and worse. This drug taking causes more
rapid deterioration. Moreover, in very young children, there is always the
additional problem of vaccination.

There has been a great deal of evidence, as described by Robert A.
Mendelsohn, M.D., former head of the American Pediatric Society and chief of
a large pediatric hospital in Chicago before his death, that damage to young
children has been caused by vaccination. In many children, the introduction of
attenuated germs or viruses is sufficient to cause severe damage, brain
dysfunction, diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis. Dr. Mendelsohn’s warnings
and writings were violently disputed by orthodox medicine, but the fact
remains that a large number of children became brain-damaged owing to
vaccinations. The other disease effects were more difficult to prove. But we
have to ask again about the underlying problem of vaccinating against disease:
What does vaccination do to cause disease rather than prevent it? Toxins
introduced into the body and not completely excreted can cause enzyme
inhibition. When particular enzymes are blocked or inhibited, certain nutrients
are improperly digested and excreted. And that is where disease begins.

An eighty-two-year-old physician, H. R. Feinstein, M.D., of Los Angeles,
was seen at the Gerson Therapy hospital mainly because he suffered from
rather severe osteoarthritis pain in his hip and other doctors had urged him to
submit to a hip replacement operation. He refused and came into the Gerson
program instead. However, he had other problems. This physician maintained
himself on medication for high blood pressure, had a blood cholesterol count of
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 243

over 300 (up to 200 is normal), and suffered from a severe loss of hearing. Dr.
Feinstein brought his wife along, who also suffered from arthritis, but her
problem was rheumatoid rather than osteoarthritis. She too was victimized by a
high cholesterol count.

The doctor was amazed that his cholesterol count came down by over 100
points in one week. Then he was able to reduce his high blood pressure
medication. Toward the end of their second week at the hospital, the Feinstein’s
son was in a serious auto accident, and the father was, understandably, very
anxious and nervous. Just to be sure, he took an extra dose of blood pressure
medication and promptly had a fainting episode. The Gerson physicians at the
hospital were worried since this man, after all, was eighty-two years old. So the
physicians took emergency measures. But they found that Dr. Feinstein’s blood
pressure was simply too low from his having popped down the medication.

As time passed and the hypertension medication left his bloodstream,
he became normal again and was perfectly fine. By the end of the third week at
the hospital, the patient's hearing had vastly improved, and his blood pressure
remained normal without medication.

The pain in Dr. Feinstein’s hip disappeared, and his osteoarthritis stopped
bothering him. Of course, his hip did not heal completely, but from an X-ray
examination he could see that the healing process had started and the friction
was down, eliminating the pain. In his wife’s case, her swollen finger, too, was
improved, but due to her rushing off to her son's side, Mrs. Feinstein’s
treatment was interrupted and her results were not as dramatic.

Another patient with osteoarthritis, Mrs. Marion Sands, a librarian aged
sixty-one, arrived at the Gerson Tijuana hospital with extremely deformed
knuckles and fingers. She wore a leather shaping form to hold her fingers
aligned in a normal position. She went through a three-week program and
went home with knowledge to help herself. After some two years on the
Gerson Therapy, at home, her hands became almost normal. The fingers were
straight and her muscles were restored so that she was able to use her hands
fairly well thereafter, never again needing any kind of leather brace.

As mentioned before, patients suffering from osteoarthritis have long-term,
deep damage, and it takes a good deal of time and ongoing adherence to the
Gerson Therapy to slowly restore the bones and muscles. But the important
thing is that it can be done if the patient has enough determination and will
stay long enough with this demanding and rather restrictive nutritional
therapy.

OsTEOPOROSIS
In osteoporosis, patients suffer from decalcification of the bones. The
244 THE GERSON THERAPY

presence of that problem tends to produce a reaction from the average al-
lopathic physician. More often than not, he or she tells the patient to drink
plenty of milk (for calcium). Unfortunately, this is a simplistic and incorrect
approach to the problem.

First of all, we must remember that excess protein as in milk causes the
disease in the first place. Second, we have seen in Pottenger’s classic book Cats,
a Study in Nutntion,® that heat-damaged, pasteurized milk or cooked milk
products are not absorbed without the live enzymes and do no good at all, only
harm. Using calcium supplementation doesn’t work, either. Calcium tablets are
not well assimilated. Calcium has to enter the
Modified Therapy for Noncancer Patients 245

body in the proper combination, together with active, live enzymes that we find
in carrot juice, juice from green salad leaves, and a great deal of fresh lettuce.

In those fresh organically grown foods, the body receives not pharma-
ceutical calcium but the complete mineral nutrients aside from calcium:
magnesium, manganese, zinc, copper, potassium, iodine, and many more
together with the active enzymes to allow the body to assimilate these minerals
and lodge them in the bones. In this manner, the Gerson Therapy not only
alleviates calcium deficiency but allows one’s body to actually rebuild bone.

The Gerson Therapy has been observed to be effective in improving
calcification of bone for osteoporosis.

STEROID TREATMENT

When conventionally administered allopathic steroid treatment is received
by patients such as those with systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid
arthritis, gastrointestinal disorders, brain tumors, and other conditions, such
cortisone medication must not be discontinued suddenly and the Gerson
Therapy substituted in its place. Using appropriate monitoring, the proper
procedure is to slowly wean the patient off steroid medications as
appropriately as possible. These sick people on steroids, which have terrible
side effects, are more likely to experience stomach irritation. Acidol and niacin
should be eliminated until five days after steroids have been deleted from the
bloodstream, and potassium should be reduced to 10 or 20 tsp per day.

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS, RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS,

AND SCLERODERMA

Upon elimination of steroids, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), scleroderma (all collagen diseases) respond ex-
ceptionally well to the Gerson Therapy. However, there will be poor healing
even with the Gerson Therapy in those situations where steroids have been
taken by the patient for periods over two years, or when the patient has been
pretreated with chemotherapy. For SLE and RA, enemas should be limited to
two to three per day. Reactions can be severe, and patients must be monitored
carefully during the reaction period.

ULCERATIVE COLITIS

People who are the victims of ulcerative colitis, even when bleeding, may
respond surprisingly well to the Gerson Therapy. We have observed several
people who have gone into full, long-term remissions. Chamomile replaces
246 THE GERSON THERAPY

coffee in enemas at the outset of treatment, and certain raw foods are avoided
for a short period. Ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease, irritable bowel syndrome,
leaky gut syndrome, and other intestinal difficulties do show positive reactions
when the Gerson Therapy is made the patient's treatment plan.

References for Chapter Seventeen

1. McPhee, S.J.; Schroeder, S.A. “General approach to the patient; health
maintenance & disease prevention; & common symptoms.” In Current Medical
Diagnosis and Treatment), 36th ed., ed. by L.M. Tierney, S.J. McPhee, and M.A.
Papadakis. Stamford, Conn.: Appleton & Lange, 1997, p. 14.

2. Bishop, B. A Time to Heal: Triumph over Cancer. The Therapy of the Future.
New York: Penguin Putnam, 1985.

3. Schauss, A. Diet, Crime and Delinquency. Seattle, Wash.: Life Sciences
Press, 1988.

4. Karam, J.H. “Diabetes mellitus & hypoglycemia.” In Current Medical
Diagnosis and Treatment), 36th ed, ed. by L.M. Tierney, S.J. McPhee, M.A.
Papadakis. Stamford, Conn.: Appleton & Lange, 1997, pp. 1069-1109.

5. Kumar, P; Clark, M. Clinical Medicine. London: Balliere Tindall
Publishing, 1994, pp. 830-831.

6. Op. cit., Karam, J.H., p. 1090.

7. Ibid., Karam, J.H., p. 1096.

8. Pottenger, F. Cats, a Study in Nutrition. San Diego, Calif.: Price Pottenger
Nutrition Foundation, 1983.
Part Four

USING THE
GERSON
APPROACH
Chapter Eighteen

PSYCHOLOGICAL
APPROACHES OF THE
GERSON THERAPY

GG erson patients bear an extra heavy psychological burden. Often, they come
to the Gerson Therapy after having run the gauntlet of some difficult-to-
accept orthodox treatments. These establishment-type therapies offered in
North America are frequently adversely extensive, somewhat unpleasant,
uncomfortable, and sometimes life-threatening. The patient usually will have
already drained his financial resources, squandered his immunity, and made
heavy demands on his emotions. Such a situation happens because of a
patient's need to go through frequent diagnostic laboratory procedures,
frightening clinical examinations, anxiety-driven biopsies, and numbers of
other upsetting medical or psychological experiences.

The cancer patient especially is often traumatized by a widespread belief
that nothing much can be done to conquer cancer. And that view may be true in
many cases, judging from the high mortality rates accompanying most forms of
allopathic chemotherapy and radiation therapy.

Even the newly accepted immunotherapy has its unwelcome pitfalls. From
the conventional viewpoint, a patient may be led to believe that in the end,
cancer is unbeatable.

The cancer patient and his or her family may arrive at the Gerson treatment
facility depressed and, in many instances, taken over by a range of negative
feelings, including worry, grief, fear, sadness, anger, irritability, and self-
centeredness. Even for these depressed, anxious, and generally unfortunate
people, the Gerson Therapy offers healing and hope.

We have observed that other patients who strive to employ the Gerson
procedures at an earlier, less-damaged stage often have fewer difficulties
258 THE GERSON THERAPY
overcoming their lack of wellness. Receiving Gerson Therapy sooner rather
than later is better for achieving healing and health maintenance.

Either way, the two types of unhappy patients, early attendees and later
arrivals, embark on the unfamiliar Gerson treatment outside the bounds of
orthodox medicine. Consequently, they do face a long, demanding,
monotonous, and lonely labor, with strong hope and determination, but with
no guarantee of success at the end. Psychological aspects do play a role in the
healing process, and either the standard or the modified Gerson protocol will
provide some procedural guidelines.

PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE GERSON THERAPY

Because of cancer’s life-threatening nature, patients beset by malignant
neoplasms in particular and those who suffer from other chronic diseases
progress faster and more competently toward healing when they receive
psychological support. An important factor of the Gerson Therapy is that its
several detoxification aspects have excellent effects on the patient's outlook.
The inherent toxicity of the standard American diet (S AD) and lifestyle tends to
bring toxins into the blood and general systemic circulation. These poisons also
reach the brain and tend to affect the mind by increasing anxiety, depression,
fear, panic, and more.

Just starting with the detoxification of the Gerson Therapy, in a few days the
patients improve considerably, feel more confident, and exhibit greater
emotional stability. Nevertheless, we are advocates of additional
psychotherapeutic help whenever available.

Dr. Gerson once stated that more human beings die of panic than from
cancer. The body involves but one part of the illness. When the sickness also
produces fear, the combination causes a systemic accumulation of more and
more toxins in the body and a quickening of physiological deterioration. A
better understanding of fear and the other negative emotions and what they do
to someone 011 the mend is essential.

Inasmuch as our every human thought and emotion equals a biochemical
act, the science of psychoneuroimmunology tells us that feelings, moods, and
general outlook affect each person’s immune system It is boosted by a hopeful,
determined outlook and undermined by a despairing, helpless attitude. If the
truth be known, any cancer diagnosis equals mental and emotional trauma
with reactions ranging from despair and panic to apathy or rage, all of them
powerful negative perturbations of the conscious mind. These emotions
hamper the affected individual's immunity to a malignancy’s deadly attack.

Since the aim of Gerson personnel is to rebuild the diseased patient's
damaged immune system, psychological factors must not be allowed to
Psychological Approaches of the Gerson Therapy 261

sabotage physical healing. A holistically oriented therapist dispels mental and
emotional (psychic) negativity in order to reinforce the physical (somatic)
immunity. If you are working on your own as the patient or as a caregiver for
such a patient without the support of a Gerson hospital setting, our advice is to
focus your healing procedures on handling negative emotions. They are
destructive and must be eliminated. The patient's traumatized negative inner
state must be reprogrammed and turned positive.

“No attempt should be made to cure the body without [curing] the soul,”
wrote Plato nearly 2,400 years ago. Body and mind are inseparable; they sicken
together and must be healed together. Otherwise, chances for success in
regaining health will be greatly lessened. Neither the Gerson program nor any
other therapeutic method will work effectively if something in the patient's
consciousness keeps saying no to life.

Indeed, negative emotions have a devastating effect upon the function of the
body, and especially the nervous system. The stressful experiences arising from
negative emotions cause unhealthy stimulation of the autonomic or
involuntary division of the nerves, including both the sympathetic and
parasympathetic branches. Blood pressure, heart rate, respiration rate, and
oxygen consumption are increased. Glucose is needlessly used up. Kidney
filtration, gastrointestinal secretions, and activity are decreased, affecting
digestion and the release of body wastes and toxins. Insommia, fatigue, loss of
appetite, listlessness, avoidance, and boredom are observed in the patient.

All of these physical faults manifesting themselves in the autonomic
nervous system must be diluted and countered to the point of eliminating
them. How may somebody do that for himself or herself? How might a
therapist help the patient to neutralize such negative physiological responses?
The renowned author Norman Cousins, Ph.D., furnished his readers with
substantial healing tools when, in his best-selling Anatomy of an Illness, he
described how positive emotions are powerful mobilizers for the patient's
natural healing resources.

EMPHASIS ON POSITIVE EMOTIONS AS POWERFUL HEALING
TOOLS

Positive emotions are powerful weapons in the unwell individual’s war
against disease. Laughter, courage, tenacity, love and consideration for others,
and a connection to the patient's own understanding of spirituality are all
positive passions or sentiments. Dr. Cousins wrote:

Increasingly, in the medical press, articles are being published about the
high cost of the negative emotions. Cancer, in particular, has been connected
to intensive states of grief or anger or fear. It makes little sense to suppose
260 THE GERSON THERAPY
that emotions exact only penalties and confer no benefits. At any rate, long
before my own serious illness, I became convinced that creativity, the will to
live, hope, faith, and love had biochemical significance and contribute
strongly to healing and to well-being. The positive emotions are life-giving
experiences.?

The French physicist and Nobel laureate Marie Curie, Ph.D., stated,
“Nothing in life is to be feared; it is only to be understood. Now is the time to
understand more, so that we may fear less.” The understanding of a disease
process and its cause should be the first step in conquering any sickness.
Identifying the underlying reason that an illness exists will enable a distressed
patient to comprehend the workings and purpose of the Gerson program and
why it’s bound to be effective.

Someone critically ill will likely find it difficult to concentrate on thoroughly
learning Dr. Gerson’s concepts; consequently, the family or accompanying
caregiver must assist with this function. Understanding and accepting the
Gerson approach to achieving wellness takes away some of the fear by showing
that there is hope of reversing the disease process.

Words alone will not obliterate all of the fear, and we acknowledge that a
favorable result is really what counts. Early improvement in the diseased state
will do more than anything else to resurrect hope. Many patients newly
arriving at a Gerson health facility have lost the will to eat and drink.

But that situation soon changes for the better. The Gerson program helps
such a person over this difficult period, giving the individual simple foods and
juices which the body is able to easily digest. Such an easing of the metabolism
is vital, for then we will see a restoration of blood flow, an improvement in the
nervous system, and an overall pickup of bodily functions. The patient begins
to eat, drink, and sleep much better, and almost immediately he or she starts to
feel strengthened. An interest in life is stimulated. Probably for the first time
since the patient heard his or her diagnosis and prognosis, there is a prospect of
living a long life. There can be a future.

SOME FUNCTIONS OF A CAREGIVER (FAMILY MEMBER OR

FRIEND)

Still, a drastic change of lifestyle is required by the Gerson Therapy. For the
patient, living each day inevitably has its ups and downs with healing crises
occurring all too frequently. The healing process offers a severe test for even the
most committed patient. It becomes the job of any caregiver to lighten that
patient's burden with steady support, empathy, and well- focused counseling.
How are these caregiving functions carried out? By the caregiver's achieving
full completion of specific beneficial tasks. They include:
Psychological Approaches of the Gerson Therapy 261

* Creating a safe space for the patient to occupy through total listening and
offering nonjudgmental attention.

¢ Building a healing partnership with the patient, turning him or her into
an active ally able to share responsibility for the therapeutic process.

* Dispelling the superstitious fear attached to cancer. This is done by
reprogramming the patient's consciousness, helping to reframe harmful
concepts; and by identifying self-defeating patterns and eliminating
them.

* Exploring the patient's belief system and the family dynamics in which
he or she is embroiled. If the family dynamics are negative or hostile to
the therapy, an attempt must be made to reverse such dynamics. Or, get
the patient out of the disruptive environment. Or, take the source of
disruption away from the patient's environment.

* Dealing with resentment and unfinished business facing the patient.

* Coping with the drastic mood swings and sometimes antisocial behavior
that can accompany the detoxification process.

A caregiver is very necessary to prevent the patient from deciding that the

Gerson treatment program is impossible to face at home on one’s
own. The caregiver assists a patient in almost all aspects of accomplishing the
Gerson Therapy. It starts out with shopping for food and moves on to securing
deliveries, cooking the foods, checking on helpers, preparing juices, allotting
juice portions, establishing the daily routine, keeping on top of the program
routine, washing up endlessly, making the enema coffee, offering aid if an
enema goes askew, coping with healing reactions and other forms of flare-up,
relieving boredom, injecting enthusiasm into the treatment, and above all,
causing sanity to prevail for both patient and caregiver.

The caregiver needs to be prepared for alterations in emotions that arise as
the patient's body is freed of its residual poisons. Journalist and psychotherapist
Beata Bishop of London, England, tells us, “Physical detoxification inevitably
brings about psychological detoxification, too. Toxins passing through the
central nervous system evoke strange reactions and out-of-character behavior:
violent mood swings, snappiness, anger, instability, unfair accusations, and
aggression. The patient’s normally civilized behavior gives way to drives and
emotions that have been denied and repressed for a long time, perhaps since
childhood. ... It is part of the process. In whatever capacity we work with the
patient, we remain calm, caring, unchanged, waiting for the inner upheaval to
pass.”?
262 THE GERSON THERAPY

TOOLS AND METHODS FOR PSYCHOLOGICAL IMPROVEMENT

To offset the negative psychological aspects of serious illness—whether
cancer, heart disease, diabetes, arthritis, serious infections, or any other form of
degenerating pathology—practitioners of the Gerson Therapy are taught to
incorporate certain considerations into their treatment programs. The
extracurricular considerations include a number of psychology tools and
methods for patient application:

Employing relaxation techniques,

Creating visualizations linked to self-healing,

Engaging in simple meditations,

Repeatedly using affirmations,

Educating and developing the imaginative power of the right brain that
is creative, artistic, and idealistic,
Reversing negative family dynamics,
. Emphasizing positive actions in all situations or relationships,
8. Fully understanding the Gerson program to bring about confidence and

VP Ye

sr @

a willingness to become involved in such a demanding, rigid, and
comprehensive treatment which asks for so much self- discipline,

9. Removing internal physical pain relatively quickly by use of coffee
enemas and other sources of detoxification, and

10. Steadily exhibiting symptomatic results the patient sees and feels.

Below, we briefly discuss the first five methods and tools. These five afford
a psychological uplift for the person who is ill with cancer or another life-
threatening disorder.

Use a Relaxation Technique

For fifteen minutes, three times a day —upon arising, after lunch, and before
retiring —relax deeply by use of a progressive relaxation technique. First relax
the head, next the neck, then the shoulders, and in progression all of the rest of
the body from top to bottom completely down to the toes.

This relaxation is achieved by proceeding with the technique taught by Jose
Silva of Silva Mind Control fame. Here is how to proceed:

Sit comfortably in a chair or lie on the floor.
Close the eyes and relax.

Take a deep lung-filling inhalation.

During exhalation, relax the body even more.
Count slowly backward from 100 to 1.
Daydream about some peaceful place you know.

Sg gm & Se

Mentally verbalize a strong affirmation such as “T will always maintain
Psychological Approaches of the Gerson Therapy 261

a perfectly healthy body and mind.”
8. Go into the well-practiced creative visualizations you've developed for
yourself which provide the greatest comfort.’

Create Visualizations

There is a basic technique of creative visualization which Shakti Ga- wain,
renowned pioneer and teacher of the consciousness movement, offers to her
students. It involves the following step-by-step procedure:

1. Apply your personal method of relaxation, perhaps the same technique

suggested by Jose Silva;

2. Imagine a healthy state of the body that you want very much to

possess;

3. Imagine this healthy body state in your possession, admire it, enjoy it,

show it to loved ones and friends;

4. Make some positive statements (affirmations) about this healthy body

state;

5. End the visualization with firm avowals that you will have this healthy

body state permanently.4

Once relaxed and able to visualize readily, start the healing process in
earnest. Picture the body with its growing tumor, and imagine that tumor
stopping its growth. Then see it getting smaller. During each of these relaxation
sessions, visualize the tumor shrinking a tiny bit more than the last time. Also
imagine the very active immune system, however you may picture it, with that
protective system's all-encompassing white blood cells (leukocytes), which
consist of the lymphocytes, the phagocytes, the monocytes, and much more.

Engage in Simple Meditations

Meditation, a state of consciousness in which one stops awareness of the
surroundings so the mind can focus on a single precept, leads to rest and relief
from stress. It takes patience and persistence to develop the power of
concentration required in meditation. The mind will naturally wander to other
things and images. One’s attention must be returned to the subject over and
over again. It may be frustrating to discover just how easily the attention
wanders. Consider that the subject of a meditation is similar to that of a target;
stray thoughts will often prevent hitting the bull’s-eye.5

A wide variety of meditation techniques are used to clear the mind of
stressful outside disturbances. The method that follows below, as taught by Dr.
Lawrence LeShan, is just one of many meditation procedures that we could
describe.

Meditation is a purposefully directed and harmonious application of the
264 THE GERSON THERAPY

mind. And the Indian Yogi Maharishi’s teachings ask: “What is the mind? It is
only a bundle of thoughts. Stop thinking and show me then, where is the
mind?”

Psychotherapist Lawrence LeShan, Ph.D., another pioneer who explores
therapeutic and ethical implications of meditation and visualizations, offers us a
means of reaching into the mind by counting breaths. It is a technique used in
Zen training, and the object is to be doing just one thing as completely and fully
as possible. The single thing, in this case, is counting one’s exhalations.

“Strive to be aware of just counting breaths and be as fully aware of it as
possible,’ Dr. LeShan advises. “All your attention is gently and firmly and
repeatedly brought to bear on this activity. The goal is to have your whole
being involved in the counting. ... In this exercise one is paying as full and
complete attention as possible to the counting itself, Thoughts, feelings,
impressions, sensory perceptions, to the degree that they are conscious, are a
wandering away from the instructions.”

We suggest that you draw in your senses by counting the breaths up to four
counts. Then begin the count again. To fill up the time elapsed between counts,
add the word “and” after each of the exhalation counts. Thus you would count
“one” —“and’ —“two” — “and” —“three” —“and’— “four.” Then repeat the

count. This is a very fine technique for bringing you into a meditative state.°

Repeatedly Use Affirmations

Among the most important elements of creative visualization are affir-
mations, strong and positive statements declaring that something exists or is
already so.’ When an individual states, “I am getting better and better,’ the
mind tells the body. Be assured: The body believes everything that it hears the mind
say. The stream of thoughts that runs through one’s mind are vital to the body's
health, for if the ideas and words we use are unknowingly negative, a small
amount of this negation attaches itself to one’s physical self. Those words get
stuck in the mind and seep out to the rest of oneself.

And, if the negative notions are knowingly painful to others, those ideas are
disaffirmations that come back to destroy you. Remember that old cliché which
has proven itself all too true: “What goes around comes around.”

The practice of silently verbalizing affirmations (or speaking them aloud)
allows the verbalizer to replace negative, stale, worn-out programming from
the past with positive or constructive concepts and themes to transform
attitudes and expectations about life and health. You can write down the
affirmations too or chant them as rhymes or sing them as songs. Repeatedly
using affirmations is vital for bringing about healing.

Exponents of the Gerson Therapy encourage the application of tangible
health-producing affirmations having to do with acute or chronic illnesses and
Psychological Approaches of the Gerson Therapy 261

infectious or degenerative diseases that are causing difficulty. Here we offer just
a few samples of affirmations you might create and use for yourself:

Every day in every way I am getting better, better, and better.

Iam vibrantly healthy and radiantly beautiful!

Iam healthy and whole and complete in myself.

1 give thanks now for my life of perfect health and happiness.

1 amhappy to be alive and well, anticipating what the future brings.
Inow recognize and accept the excellence of my healing path.

I love and appreciate myself just as I am.

Iamconquering illness because the treatment is working.

At this point we have some suggestions about how to use affirmations to
create health and happiness:

1.

Always phrase affirmations in the present tense, as if what you aim for
already exists. See your goal as being reality now and as something to
come. That's because everything is created first in the mind before it
becomes manifest in the physical.

Phrase affirmations in the most constructive manner possible by stating
what is definitely wanted, rather than what is not wanted. Avoid
disaffirmations except when eliminating emotional blocks or bad
habits. If it is necessary to say something negative, follow up
immediately with another thing that's positive.

Use shorter affirmations instead of longer ones so that they remain clear
and convey strong feelings.

Hold on to the affirmative statement only if it fits you well and feels
right for your body and mind.

Have the affirmation produce a feeling of belief within you by sus-
pending doubts or hesitations about its practicality.

Use affirmations repeatedly whether alone or in combination with
creative visualizations. (Affirmations accompany visualizations very
well)
Psychological Approaches of the Gerson Therapy 261
Develop the Imaginative Power of the Right Brain

It’s only in the last century and a half that real progress has been made in
understanding the mind’s workings, and even that progress has shown us how
much is yet to be learned. Just when scientists think they have located areas
where activities such as thinking, remembering, and speaking are based, a new
situation appears which proves that the answer is by no means certain. Yet we
are gathering knowledge about the imaginative power of the right brain—at
least we know that the mind is infinitely more subtle than was previously
thought. Everyone who possesses what has been called a “normal’ mind
actually owns a much larger ability and potential than had been determined a
mere fifty years ago.8

The brain of each human being has two sides, the left hemisphere and the
right hemisphere. Each side of the brain has different mental functions which
scientists refer to as lateralization, meaning that various mental abilities are
parceled out laterally (to the left or right side).

The left hemisphere functions most effectively for purposes of reading,
writing, arithmetic and number skills, calculation, spoken language and
language skills, scientific skills, reasoning, linear processing, logical procedures,
and right-hand control. The right hemisphere best controls music awareness,
spatial construction and artistic intelligence, holistic thinking, imagination,
insight, intuition, three-dimensional and pattern perception, and left-hand
control. Added to these, the right brain deals with relaxation, imagination,
creativity, visualization, meditation, and affirmations.®

As an interesting aside, women have more-developed left hemispheres and
thus outperform men on tests of verbal fluency. And women do better on
remembering details. In navigating through the world, however, men possess
more of a sense of a spatial map in their mind, while women pay attention to
and use local landmarks as guides. The mental differences between the sexes
may be partly due to hormones.1011'12

Inasmuch as the right hemisphere provides more efficacy with the psy-
chology of surviving cancer, we highly recommend that the person with a
degenerative disease develop the imaginative power of the right side of the
brain using the methods we have described.

References for Chapter Eighteen

1. Cousins, N. Anatomy of an Illness. New York: WW. Norton & Co., 1979, p.
86.
Chapter Nineteen

HOW TO FOLLOW THE

GERSON THERAPY ON YOUR

OWN

Ws are the characteristics of a person who survives cancer or another

“4ncurable” disease? We, whose work entails furnishing information for

coping with incurables, have observed the traits shown by those who thrive,

even against life-threatening odds. To open this chapter, we are sharing such

information.

Every day, the incurable disease survivor embarks on a healing journey and:

asks lots of questions and makes multiple new health discoveries;
seeks out others knowledgeable about health care;

questions the practices of conventional oncological medicine (COM);
examines offerings in complementary and alternative medicine (C AM);
uncovers and then puts aside the abundant myths perpetuated by both
medical disciplines (COM and C AM);

associates closely with a higher spiritual power;

keeps faith in, acquires hope for, and expects healing from that higher
power;

abandons self-pity and accepts personal responsibility for homeostatic
bodily functions;

avoids stressors and masters stress; and

prepares a set of principles for living well and abides by them.

In the October 1999 issue of the Townsend Letter for Doctors (5 Patients, Al
Schaefer of Seattle, Washington, discusses the successful cancer survivor. Mr.

Schaefer writes: “The survivor questions him/her self and wonders what steps

to take for correction—how to recover [and remain in a state of wellness].

He/she asks [informed persons], ‘If you were in my shoes, what would you
aro THE GERSON THERAPY
or”

The cancer survivor discovers that there is a definite belief system about
malignancy programmed into allopathic doctors that trickles down to medical
consumers through the journalistic media, which invariably take their material
from organized medicine’s propaganda mechanisms. This programming states:
“Cancer is death; it is tumor; tumor is autonomous; under no circumstances can
it be conquered!” If accepted by a cancer patient, these erroneous beliefs
severely hinder recovery and are likely to come true. Alternately, when they
are not believed their falsity becomes apparent, and the person with cancer
survives splendidly.

A second set of falsehoods leveled at the public by a brainwashed North
American medical orthodoxy is that (1) surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy is
the only effective cancer treatment, and all other therapies should be
considered quackery; (2) biopsy, excision of the lump accompanied by a
pathology examination, CAT scans, mammograms, X-ray films, and other
forms of high technology are the most reliable diagnostic methods; (3) food
quality and good nutrition have no effect upon cancer’s progress; (4) early
detection and treatment increase the odds of survival; and (5) if someone with
cancer lives five years, such an interval counts as a cure of the disease.

The above five propaganda pronouncements are unmitigated myths
perpetrated by the cancer industry, usually for financial gain. The knowing
cancer survivor recognizes statements such as these as coming from allopathic
sources. He/she knows that they are sheer fantasies, and subsequently,
develops more accurate personal beliefs based on observation and education.

“Identifying these fabrications as altogether wrong and harmful to the ill
individual, I know there must be a more effective way to gain healing and
health maintenance,” says the “incurable disease” survivor who puts the lie to
such an inaccurate label. This positive-minded patient seeks out and finds the
better way. In doing so, he or she becomes totally confident and self-reliant.

Some survivors discover their inspiration through the actions of an em-
pathetic health professional who has become disenchanted with the various
conventional myths of medicine. This doctor radiates love for patients who
eventually do push him or her into some form of alternative method of
healing —a rare physician who deserves to be cherished. Other patients become
inspired by the testimonies of survivors who are proof that cancer or another
illness is reversible. Tumor, for instance, turns out to merely be a symptom of
some pathology that’s treatable, but to which treatment had not yet been
applied.

The “incurable disease” survivor becomes anchored in reality. He/she
wastes no time searching for “silver bullets” or some anticancer vaccine or
another form of “miracle” cure repeatedly being promised but never delivered
by the cancer establishment. It’s realized by the sophisticated individual that
How to Follow the Gerson Therapy on Your Own 271

our cancer industry reaps vast profits each time it predicts such a cure if only
enough money could be donated.

Instead of a miracle cure, the disease survivor searches for nontoxic al-
ternatives and asks, “How many have been helped by this treatment? Do you
know someone who recovered by its use? Can I talk to the recovered person?
Does it have detrimental side effects? What are they? Also, what are the
product's ingredients or the method's procedures?”

A cancer survivor continues to nourish his/her body with excellent food
containing all the essential nutrients and cleanses it internally and externally.
One’s body is considered a temple for the soul. The patient has become vegan
with the ingestion of no animal products, drinking from ten to fourteen glasses
of vegetable or fruit juices a day. All drugs, soft drinks, coffee, chocolate, and
processed foods are avoided. And only those certain adjunctive practices or
medications permitted by the Gerson program are brought home to be
introduced into the body.

If engaging in the Gerson Therapy at home, the supposedly “incurable
disease” survivor requires self-discipline, determination, and the vigorous
pursuit of human body knowledge. He or she becomes a student of organic
agriculture, nutritional science, body detoxification, psychology, visualization,
meditation, the politics surrounding cancer’s medical treatments, and much
more general information connected with degenerative diseases. This
individual becomes an educator about what's pure, good, and true for the
welfare of body and mind. There is much sharing with others. Most of all,
although difficult to pursue, complete recovery from illness using the program
developed by Dr. Max Gerson continues for the patient at home.

Without any question or doubt, an incurable disease survivor affirms that
self administering the Gerson Therapy at home is the principal means by which
one ensures that perfect health remains evermore.

AN INTRODUCTION TO SELF-ADMINISTERING THE GERSON

THERAPY AT HOME

To understand and apply the Gerson Therapy at home to increase the
chances of beating back most of the incurable diseases, the balance of this
chapter offers a quick reference format for various aspects of the healing
program It also explains recent developments in adjuvant therapies, too.
Practical help for those seeking the required materials and supplies used for the
Gerson Therapy, sometimes difficult to obtain, is given. The authors, primarily
Charlotte Gerson, who is most conversant with her father’s therapy, are
drawing on more than forty years of experience in “curing the incurables”.

For people who are afflicted, or who have loved ones suffering with all types
of life-threatening degenerative diseases, starting immediately below with
272 THE GERSON THERAPY
information about adjuvant therapies we show how patients can become their

own healers.

Because the Gerson Therapy is the primary management tool for eliminating
illness, any agent, material, technique, or procedure added to it must be
characterized as adjuvant, or supportive in nature. No adjuvant agent should be
used at the expense of a regular Gerson procedure or medication in the hope of
improving that adjuvant’s performance. If a Gerson-trained physician makes an
alteration in the healing program, however, adjunctive treatment under that
doctor's supervision is permissible. Furthermore, always consult your Gerson
Therapy physician with regard to any promising new addition to the treatment.

ADJUNCTIVE THERAPIES THAT FIT INTO THE GERSON

PROCEDURE

The procedures and materials listed below are available at all Gerson fa-
cilities in a form compatible with the Gerson Therapy. Please be aware that each
Gerson Center is separately owned and licensed by the Gerson Institute. At any
given facility, certain additional therapies cited below may or may not be
available. The Gerson-trained physician in charge may choose to recommend
the addition of one or more of such adjunctive therapies.

Laetrile, the purified form of amygdalin, which occurs naturally in the
How to follow the (Jerson therapy on lour uwn gu

pits of apricots and in some other foods, is a cyanogenic glycoside (containing
cyanide). While it is nontoxic, laetrile by itself does not cure. It is used as an
analgesic and has other purported anticancer properties. Laetrile is not part of
the routine Gerson Therapy.

When a Gerson patient elects to add laetrile to the Gerson program, this
supplemental material must in no way replace the central and continuous work
of the Gerson Therapy. (Some laetrile therapists have recommended dietary
measures counterproductive to natural healing progress with the Gerson
Therapy. Do not follow those non-Gerson measures.)

Polanzing treatment, described in Merck’s Manual of Standard Medical
Procedures, aids potassium travel through the cell membrane by a transport
mechanism. It is an addition to the Gerson protocol pioneered by Dr. Demetrio
Sodi-Pallares, a noted Mexico City cardiologist and researcher. The basic
polarizing solution, GKI, is necessary to provide a transport mechanism to help
potassium (K) travel through the cell membrane for those patients who are
deficient in K. It is combined with glucose (G) and insulin (I) together as an
intravenous injection.

Polarizing treatment promotes healing in the diseased heart and in tissues
damaged by cancer and other degenerative diseases. Patients with edema in the
extremities note a rapid reabsorption and release of the fluids from the body.

Oxygen therapies, including hydrogen peroxide (H,02) and ozone (0s)
therapy, boost serum oxygen levels to revitalize normal cells while damaging
viruses and other pathogens. It may be absorbed through the skin by bathing in
it (4 to 5 pints of 3 percent H202 in a standard-size bathtub), applied topically, or
insufflated rectally. Ambient air ozone generators are used to benefit patients
by delivering 0).

In addition to the usual intensive Gerson Therapy, some adjuvant proce-
dures such as those mentioned and several others are being made available in
the Gerson hospital or other Gerson facilities but at an extra charge.

Live cell therapy, the ingestion by injection or orally of fetal tissue cells for the
strengthening of specific organs, is more effective after good detoxification has
taken place. It should not be tried during the initial stages of Gerson Therapy. It
may be available on request from your (Person Therapy facility.

Pancreatin, highly concentrated pancreatic enzymes for dissolving and
digesting tumor tissue, help patients if they carry a heavy tumor load. The
additional intensive pancreatin has improved the patient's ability to eliminate
many kinds of neoplasms.
274 THE GERSON THERAPY
Tahebo tea (pau d’arco or lapacho), has been shown repeatedly to have

anticancer properties. It is used as a tea by native Indians of the Americas.

Vitarmn C, administered orally and rectally, works to offset the free radical
pathology connected with chemotherapy and radiation.

Hyperthernua/Hydrotherapy, full-body immersion in a bathtub containing hot
water to elevate the body temperature to 104°F for the induction of a mild
fever, tends to deteriorate tumor tissue. It’s best used after the administration
of laetrile. This combination of hot tub fomentation with laetrile is one of the
best remedies for overcoming pain. It dulls and calms the discomfort and is a
great assist to detoxification by improving the blood flow and lymphatic
circulation. Patients with nervous system disease such as MS should not be
subjected to high temperature. Cool compresses are more beneficial for them.
Important: not to be used with fluoridated water systems.

Clay poultice, a soft composition powder mixed with water and applied as a
mud pack to an inflamed body part for purposes of absorbing toxins of
arthritis, cancer, insect stings, diarrhea, and poisons, it has an adsorptive effect
like that of charcoal. The clay poultice aids detoxification. Clay powder can
also be used internally to clear gastrointestinal difficulties and inflammations.
The procedure for applying a clay poultice should involve the following steps:

1. Prepare enough warm water to mix the needed amount of clay powder
into a paste.

Apply the paste quickly to a square of clean muslin to prevent cooling.
Place the muslin on an area to be treated.

Cover the area with plastic and wool cloth.

Pin the covering in place and leave it on overnight or until dry.
Remove and gently rub the area with a cold wet cloth.

Repeat this procedure as required.

Discard used clay pack.

SNA YD

References for Chapter Nineteen

1. Schaefer, A. “Some characteristics of cancer survivors.” Townsend Letter
for Doctors & Patients. 195:70-71, October 1999.
Chapter Twenty

GERSON LAB TESTS
EXPLAINED

I n this chapter we explain the significance of certain laboratory tests that
are necessary for monitoring one’s healing progress. Laboratory testing of
blood and urine are a standard part of follow-up protocols for Gerson Therapy
patients employed by all Gerson-trained health professionals. Among
practitioners invited to administer the Gerson program are medical doctors,
osteopathic physicians, and naturopathic physicians.

If you are a patient utilizing the Gerson approach to healing but have no
access to a trained Gerson health practitioner to act as your ombudsman, it’s
still possible to have appropriate monitoring performed. Accomplish this by
hiring the services of a conventionally practicing allopathic physician who is
willing to order laboratory examinations for you or for ill loved ones (of course,
for a fee). Then, using the guidance of this chapter, you probably will be able to
interpret the test results. But, you do need a licensed health professional's
prescription to have laboratory tests conducted.

Moreover, from observations made over many years of counseling de-
generative disease patients, the coauthors know that combining a doctor's
interpretation with information offered below will give you an understanding
of what is happening physiologically in your healing body. We offer this
caution, however: Suggestions by allopathic, non-Gerson- educated
practitioners for you to take drugs or make food changes may not be in your
best interest and could very well be contraindicated.

Explanations and interpretations are provided here to help our readers
Lio I HE GERSON THERAPY

feel less intimidated by unfamiliar medical terms, and to acquaint them with
current knowledge about the required laboratory tests in the event they must
monitor themselves without assistance by any health professional. If you want
education about some specific test other than what is furnished here, we
recommend that you query the laboratory conducting the particular
examination for you. It’s your right to know about tissues and other specimens
taken from your own body.

THE SERUM CALCIUM LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for serum calcium is a measurement of the levels of
calcium in the blood. Knowing such levels helps a health professional to
interpret the patient's physiological status regarding neuromuscular activity,
enzyme activity, skeletal development, and blood coagulation.

Calcium (Ca*) is a predominantly extracellular ion (a cation) derived from
the calcium absorbed in food through the gastrointestinal tract, provided
sufficient vitamin D is present in the food eaten. Excess quantities of calcium
ions in the blood are excreted in the urine and feces, while insufficient calcium
concentrations can move out of the storage areas of bones and teeth to restore
low blood levels. Daily ingestion of 1 gram of calcium is necessary for normal
calcium balance. For Gerson patients, this should not be given in the form of
supplements. Juices and foods contain more than adequate amounts of calcium.

Serum calcium testing aids in diagnosing arrhythmias, blood-clotting
deficiencies, acid-base imbalance, and disorders of the neuromuscular, skeletal,
and endocrine systems. Normal adult serum calcium levels range from 8.9 to
10.1 mg/dL (atomic absorption is 2.25 to 2.75 mmol/L). Serum calcium levels
for children are higher than for adults.

When the level of Ca* is too high, a condition of Irypercalcerma prevails
indicating the possibility of one or more of the following pathologies:
hyperparathyroidism, Paget's disease of the bone, multiple myeloma,
metastatic carcinoma, multiple fractures, and prolonged immobilization. From
inadequate excretion of calcium, also shown by elevated serum calcium, kidney
disease and adrenal insufficiency may result.

In contrast, low calcium levels (known as lypocalcenua) may come from
hypoparathyroidism, total parathyroidectomy, or malabsorption. Decreased
serum Ca* levels may arise from calcium loss in Cushing’s syndrome, kidney
(renal) failure, acute pancreatitis, and periotonitis.

Hypercalcemia may bring on deep bone pain, flank pain from renal calculi,
and muscle hypotonicity. Its beginning symptoms are manifested by nausea,
vomiting, and dehydration, leading to stupor and coma, and may end in
cardiac arrest.
Gerson Lab Tests Explained pee

Hypocalcemia may produce peripheral numbness and tingling, muscle
twitching, facial muscle spasm (Chvostek’s sign), carpopedal spasm
(Trousseau’s sign), seizures, and arrhythmias.

THE SERUM PHOSPHATES LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for serum phosphates is a measurement of the blood
levels of phosphates to tell the state of body energy, carbohydrate metabolism,
lipid metabolism, and acid-base balance. Phosphate ion (P*) is the dominant
cellular anion, which is essential for bone formation. Testing for its blood level
aids in the diagnosis of acid-base imbalance plus renal, endocrine, skeletal, and
calcium disorders.

Ina normal adult, serum phosphate levels range from 2.5 to 4.5 mg/dL (0.80
to 1.40 mmol/L) or from 1.8 to 2.6 mEq/L. Children show a higher range that
can rise to 7 mg/dL (2.25 mmol/L) during spurts of increased bone growth.

Phosphates are absorbed through the intestines from dietary sources in the
presence of vitamin D. Excess quantities of them are excreted through the
kidneys, which act as the regulating mechanism Because calcium and
phosphate interact in a reciprocal relationship, urinary excretion of phosphates
increases or decreases in inverse proportion to serum calcium levels.

Abnormally high concentrations of phosphates in the blood (hyper-
phosphaterma), which can come from drinking an overabundance of carbonated
beverages, sets up a pathological process of bone loss, tooth demineralization,
poor healing of fractures, hypoparathyroidism, acromegaly, diabetic acidosis,
high intestinal obstruction, and renal failure.

Depressed phosphate levels in the blood (hypophosphatenua) may result from
malnutrition, malabsorption syndromes, hyperparathyroidism, renal tubular
acidosis, or treatment of diabetic acidosis. In children, such hypophosphatemia
can suppress normal growth.
278 THE GERSON THERAPY

THE SERUM SODIUM LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for serum sodium is a measurement of the blood levels of
sodium to determine body water distribution, osmotic pressure of extracellular
fluid, neuromuscular function, and acid-base balance. The sodium ion (Na’*) is
the major extracellular cation, and it influences both chloride and potassium
blood levels.

Sodium is absorbed by the intestines and is excreted primarily by the
kidneys; a small amount is lost through the skin by sweating. This mineral aids
the kidneys in regulating body water, for decreased Na*+ promotes water
excretion and an increased level promotes water retention (edema).

Testing for Na* aids in evaluating fluid electrolytes, acid-base balance, and
certain disorders of the kidneys, adrenals, and neuromuscular system The
sodium blood test also determines the effects of drug therapy such as diuretics
on the body. For an adult, normally serum sodium levels range from 135 to 145
mEq/L (mmol/L). For Gerson patients, a level of 127 is still acceptable.

Sodium imbalance comes from either a change in water volume intake or
variation in how much sodium gets consumed. Elevated serum sodium levels
(Iypernatrerma) may be caused by inadequate water intake, diabetes insipidus,
impaired renal function, prolonged hyperventilation, severe vomiting, or
severe diarrhea. Sodium retention also comes from consuming excessive salt.
The signs and symptoms of hypernatremia are thirst, restlessness, dry mouth,
sticky mucous membranes, flushed skin, oliguria, diminished reflexes,
hypertension, dyspnea, and edema.

Ingesting too little sodium mineral for serum Na* (/xyponatremia) is rare and
doesn’t even happen on the low-sodium dietary program encouraged by the
Gerson Therapy. There is always some sodium coming from food. Still,
hyponatremia can occur, and its indications appear as apprehension, lassitude,
headache, decreased skin turgor, abdominal cramps, tremors, or convulsions. It
can come on from profuse sweating, gastrointestinal suctioning, diuretic
therapy, diarrhea, vomiting, adrenal insufficiency, burns, and chronic renal
insufficiency with acidosis. If you do have testing for serum sodium performed,
make sure to get a urine sodium determination simultaneously.

THE SERUM POTASSIUM LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for serum potassium, a quantitative analysis, is the
measurement of blood potassium for regulation of homeostasis, osmotic
equilibrium, muscle activity, enzyme activity, acid-base balance, and kidney
function. Potassium (K*) is the body’s major intracellular ion (a cation); small
amounts of it are also found in the extracellular fluid.

Since the kidneys excrete nearly all the ingested potassium, a dietary intake
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 279

of at least 40 mEq/day (mmol/d) is essential. A normal diet usually includes 60
to 100 mEq/ day of this mineral. In the blood, normal K* levels range from 3.8
to 5.5 mEq/liter (mmol/L).

Vital to maintaining electrical conduction within the cardiac and skeletal
muscles, K+ is affected by variations in the secretion of adrenal steroid
hormones and by fluctuations in pH, serum glucose levels, and serum sodium
levels. A reciprocal relationship exists between K*+ and Na*; the substantial
intake of one causes a corresponding decrease in the other. Although the body
readily conserves sodium, potassium deficiency may develop rapidly and is
quite common, because there is no efficient method for conserving potassium.

The laboratory test for serum potassium is used to evaluate clinical signs of
either potassium excess (/ryperkalenua) or potassium depletion (Iypokalenna). It
also monitors kidney function, acid-base balance, and glucose metabolism, and
evaluates arrhythmias, neuromuscular disorders, and endocrine disorders.
Hyperkalemia is common in patients with excessive cellular K* entering the
blood as in cases of burns, crushing injuries, diabetic ketoacidosis, and
myocardial infarction. It will also be present where there is reduced sodium
excretion from renal failure that causes an abnormal Nat-K* exchange and in
Addison's disease caused by the absence of aldosterone, with consequent K*
buildup and Na* depletion.

Note: Although elevated serum potassium is uncommon in Gerson Therapy
patients, if it does occur, supplemental potassium should be reduced or temporarily
discontinued. Then the consulting Gerson-trained physician should immediately be
consulted.

The signs and symptoms of hyperkalemia are weakness, malaise, nausea,
diarrhea, colicky pain, muscle irritability progressing to flaccid paralysis,
oliguria, and bradycardia. An electrocardiogram (EKG) reveals a prolonged PR
interval; wide QRS; tall, tented T wave; and ST depression. Indications of
hypokalemia are decreased reflexes; rapid, weak, irregular pulse; mental
confusion; hypotension; anorexia; muscle weakness; and paresthesia. The EKG
shows a flattened T wave, ST depression, and U
wave elevation. In severe cases of hypokalemia, ventricular fibrillation,
respiratory paralysis, and cardiac arrest could occur.

THE SERUM CHLORIDE LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for serum chloride, another quantitative analysis, is a
measurement of blood levels of the chloride ion (Cl"), the major extracellular
fluid anion. Interacting with Na*, Cl' helps maintain the osmotic pressure,
blood volume, arterial pressure, and acid-base balance. Chloride is absorbed
from the intestines and is excreted primarily by the kidneys.
280 THE GERSON THERAPY
By evaluating the body's fluid status, the serum chloride laboratory test

detects two types of fluid imbalances, acid-base (acidosis and alkalosis) and
extracellular cation-anion. Normally serum chloride levels range from 100 to
108 mEq/liter (mmol/L). Maintaining a normal amount of chloride in the
blood reflects acid-base balance by its inverse relationship to bicarbonate.
Excessive loss of gastric juices or other secretions containing chloride may
cause hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis or excessive chloride retention.
Ingesting it may lead to hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.

Elevated serum chloride levels (/yperchlorenua) can come on from severe
dehydration, complete renal shutdown, head injury (which produces
neurogenic hyperventilation), and primary aldosteroism. Manifestations consist
of stupor, rapid and deep breathing, and weakness that leads to coma.

A situation of low chloride levels in the blood (iypochlorena) is associated
with reduced blood sodium and potassium levels coming from prolonged
vomiting, gastric suctioning, intestinal fistula, chronic renal failure, or
Addison's disease. Congestive heart failure, or edema resulting in excess
extracellular fluid, can cause dilutional hypochloremia. The indications are
hypertonicity of muscles, tetany, and depressed respirations.

THE LACTIC DEHYDROGENASE (LDH) LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) is a measurement of five
specific isoenzymes which catalyze the reversible conversion of pyruvic acid
present in all muscles of the body into lactic acid. Many common diseases —
myocardial infarction (MI), pulmonary infarction, anemias, liver disease,
kidney disease, erythrocytic damage, and others— cause elevations in total
lactic dehydrogenase, and the LDH laboratory test is useful for differentiating
between them

The five identified isoenzymes in lactic dehydrogenase are LDH? and LDH?
appearing in the heart, red blood cells, and kidneys; LDH® in the lungs; and
LDH# and LDH in the liver and the skeletal muscles. Testing for these enzymes
is especially appropriate for the delayed measurement of creatine
phosphokinase (CPK) associated with MI and for monitoring patient response
to some forms of chemotherapy. Total LDH levels normally range from 48 to
115 U/L. Normal distribution of the five isoenzymes is as follows:

LDH?: 17.5% to 28.3% of total
LDH?: 30.4% to 36.4% of total
LDH®: 19.2% to 24.8% of total
LDH#: 9.6% to 15.6% of total
LDH: 5.5% to 12.7% of total
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 281

Since a vast number of illnesses involve the enzymes of LDH, this laboratory
test for lactic dehydrogenase is broadly employed for establishing diagnoses.

THE ASPARTATE TRANSAMINASE/SERUM GLUTAMIC-
OXALOACETIC TRANSAMINASE (AST/SGOT) LABORATORY
TEST

The laboratory blood examination for aspartate transaminase and serum
glutamic-oxaloacetic (AST/SGOT) is a measurement of specific amino acid
residues left behind by nitrogenous portions of the metabolized amino acids.
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is found in the cytoplasm and mitochondria
of many tissue cells, primarily in the liver, heart, skeletal muscles, kidneys,
pancreas, and red blood cells.

AST is released into blood serum in proportion to cellular damage, and its
detection (together with creatine phosphokinase and lactate dehydrogenase)
indicates myocardial infarction. The test also helps in the diagnosis of acute
liver disease. It monitors patient progress in healing. AST adult serum levels
range from8 to 20 U/L. Normal values for infants are four times higher.

Maximum elevations of AST are associated with viral hepatitis, severe
skeletal muscle trauma, extensive surgery, drug-induced liver injury, and
passive liver congestion. Levels ranging from 10 to 20 times normal may
indicate severe MI, severe infectious mononucleosis, and alcoholic cirrhosis.
Moderate-to-high levels ranging from 5 to 10 times normal indicate Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, dermatomyositis, and chronic hepatitis, along with
prodromal and resolving stages of diseases. Low-to-moderate levels of 2 to 5
times normal may show hemolytic anemia, metastatic liver tumors, acute
pancreatitis, pulmonary emboli, alcohol withdrawal syndrome, fatty liver, and
the first stages of biliary duct obstruction.

THE SERUM BILIRUBIN LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for serum bilirubin, the main product of hemoglobin
catabolism, is a measurement of bile pigment which indicates the state of health
of the liver and gallbladder. After being formed in the reticuloendothelial cells,
bilirubin is bound to albumin and then transported to the liver, where it’s
conjugated with glucuronic acid to form bilirubin glucuronide and bilirubin
diglucuronide. These two compounds are then excreted in bile. Measurement
of indirect or prehepatic (unconjugated) bilirubin helps to evalute hepatobiliary
and erythropoietic functions.

The serum bilirubin laboratory test showing elevated levels often indicates
282 THE GERSON THERAPY
liver damage in which the parenchymal cells can no longer conjugate bilirubin

with glucuronide. Then indirect bilirubin reenters the bloodstream. Also, an
elevated reading alerts the health professional to the possibility of severe
hemolytic anemia. This test aids in the differential diagnosis of jaundice, biliary
obstruction, and dangerous levels of unconjugated bilirubin.

Normally in an adult, indirect serum bilirubin measures 11 mg/dL or less;
direct serum bilirubin of less than 0.5 mg/dL). Neonates have total serum
bilirubin ranging from 1 to 12 mg/dL; if elevated to 20 mg/dL (for them, it
indicates neonatal hepatic immaturity or congenital enzyme deficiencies. An
exchange blood transfusion may then be required.

If readings of bilirubin are elevated for adults, the test advises about the
possibility of autoimmunity or transfusion reaction, hemolytic or pernicious
anemia or hemorrhage, and hepatocellular dysfunction perhaps from viral
hepatitis. Needless to say, elevated levels of direct conjugated bilirubin usually
show biliary obstruction with overflows into the bloodstream Intrahepatie
biliary obstruction may come from viral hepatitis, cirrhosis, or chlorpromazine
reaction. Extrahepatic obstruction may come from gallstones, gallbladder
cancer, pancreatic cancer, or bile duct disease.

THE SERUM GAMMA-GLUTAMYL TRANSPEPTIDASE (GGT)

LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for serum gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) is a
measurement of obstructive jaundice in neoplastic liver disease, and it’s also
useful for the detection of excessive alcohol consumption. The GGT enzyme is
sensitive to drug use and detects alcohol ingestion; therefore, it's used to
determine compliance with alcoholism treatment. It also helps in the diagnosis
of obstructive jaundice and liver cancer.

The normal range for GGT varies with age in males but not in females. For
men ages 18 to 50 it varies between 10 and 39 U/L. Older than that, males show
a GGT range from 10 to 48 U/L. The normal range in women is 6 to 29 U/L.
Elevation signals a cholestatic liver process.

Note: The immune-stimulating effect of the Gerson Therapy frequently causes a rise
in GGT blood levels

THE ACID PHOSPHATASE LABORATORY TEST

The laboratory test for acid phosphatase is a measurement of the prostatic
and erythrocytic isoenzymes to detect cancer. Active at a pil of 5, the two
phosphatase enzymes appear in the liver, spleen, red blood cells, bone marrow,
platelets, and prostate gland.
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 283

Successful treatment for prostate cancer decreases acid phosphatase levels.
Its normal values range from 0 to 1.1 Bodansky units/mL; 1 to 4 King
Armstrong units/mL; 0.13 to 0.63 Bessey-Lowery-Brock units/mL; and 0 to 6
U/LinSI units. Normal range of radioimmunoassay results is 0 to 4.0 ng/mL.

An elevated prostatic acid phosphatase test indicates Paget's disease,
Gaucher's disease, multiple myeloma, and a tumor that has spread beyond the
prostatic capsule. If metastasized to bone, the high acid phosphatase level
accompanied by a high alkaline phosphatase shows increased osteoblastic
activity — metastatic bone cancer.

THE ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE (AP) LABORATORY TEST

An enzyme that is most active at pH 9.0, alkaline phosphatase (AP) in-
fluences bone calcification and the transport of lipids and metabolites. The
alkaline phosphatase laboratory test measures combined activities of those AP
isoenzymes found in the liver, bones, kidneys, intestinal lining, and placenta.
Bone and liver AP are always present in adult blood serum, with liver AP most
prominent—except during the third trimester of pregnancy when the placenta
originates half of all AP

The AP laboratory test is particularly sensitive to mild biliary obstruction
and indicates liver lesions. Its most specific clinical application is in the
diagnosis of metabolic bone disease and detecting skeletal diseases
characterized by osteoblastic activity and local liver lesions causing biliary
obstruction such as tumor or abscess. It furnishes supplemental information for
liver function studies and GI enzyme tests, and it assesses the response to
vitamin D treatment in rickets.

The normal range of serum alkaline phosphatase varies in accordance with
the laboratory method employed, but the usual total AP levels range from 30 to
120 U/L in adults and from 40 to 200 U/L in children. Since AP concentrations
rise during active bone formation and growth, infants, children, and
adolescents normally show levels three times higher than adults. Additional
normal ranges for AP are 1.5 to 4 Bodansky units/dL; 4 to 13.5 King- Armstrong
units /dL; 0.8 to 2.5 Bessey-Lowry units /dL; 30 to 110 U/L by SMA 1260.

High AP blood levels indicate skeletal disease, intrahepatic biliary ob-
struction causing cholestasis, malignant or infectious infiltrations, fibrosis,
Paget's disease, bone metastases, hyperparathyroidism, metastatic bone tumors
from pancreatic cancer, and liver diseases before any change in blood serum
bilirubin levels.

Moderate rise in AP levels shown by this laboratory test may reflect acute
biliary obstruction from liver inflammation in active cirrhosis, mononucleosis,
osteomalacia, deficiency-induced rickets, and viral hepatitis.
284 THE GERSON THERAPY

THE ALANINE TRANSAMINASE, SERUM GLUTAMIC-PYRUVIC

TRANSAMINASE (ALT/SGPT) LABORATORY TEST

Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), one of the two enzymes that catalyze a
reversible amino group transfer reaction in the Krebs citric acid (tricarboxylic
acid) cycle, is necessary for tissue energy production. (The second enzyme is
aspartate aminotransferase.) Elevated serum ALT indicates acute hepatocellular
damage before jaundice appears. The ALT/SGPT laboratory test makes use of
spectrophotometric or colorimetric methods which detect and evaluate
treatment progress for hepatitis, cirrhosis without jaundice, liver toxicity, and
acute liver disease. It also distinguishes between myocardial and hepatic tissue
damage.

ALT values range from 10 to 32 U/L in men; from 9 to 24 U/L in women;
twice those levels in infants. When they are very high—up to 50 times
normal — viral or drug-induced hepatitis must be suspected. Or there may be
other liver disease with extensive necrosis.

Moderate-to-high levels of ALT may indicate infectious mononucleosis,
chronic hepatitis, intrahepatic cholestasis, early or improving acute viral
hepatitis, or severe hepatic congestion due to heart failure.

Slight-to-moderate ALT elevations may appear with any condition that
produces acute cellular injury in the liver such as active cirrhosis and drug-
induced or alcoholic hepatitis.

Marginal elevations possibly show acute myocardial infarction or secondary
hepatic congestion.

An interfering factor for the alanine transaminase, serum glutamic- pyruvic
transaminase laboratory test is the taking of opiate analgesics such as
morphine, codeine, and meperidine.

THE TOTAL SERUM CHOLESTEROL LABORATORY T EST

This quantitative serum analysis measures the circulating levels of free
cholesterol and cholesterol esters and reflects the amount of cholesterol
compound appearing in the body tissues. Both absorbed from the diet and
synthesized in the liver and other body tissues, cholesterol is a structural
component in cell membranes and plasma lipoproteins. It contributes to the
formation of adrenocorticoid steroids, bile salts, androgens, and estrogens. A
diet high in saturated fat raises cholesterol levels by stimulating absorption of
lipids, including cholesterol, from the intestine; a diet low in saturated fat
lowers them. Elevated total serum cholesterol is associated with an increased
risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 285

Thus, the total serum cholesterol laboratory test assesses the risk of coronary
artery disease (C AD), evaluates fat metabolism, and aids in diagnosing kidney
disease, pancreatitis, liver disease, hypothyroidism, and hyperthyroidism. Total
cholesterol concentrations vary with age and sex. Its common range is from 150
to 200 mg/dL.

A desirable blood cholesterol is below 200 mg/dL, and levels from 200 to
240 mg/dL are considered borderline or at high risk for CAD. A level in excess
of 250 mg/dL (Iypercholesterolenia) indicates high risk of cardio-vascular
disease, incipient hepatitis, lipid disorders, bile duct blockage, nephrotic
syndrome, obstructive jaundice, pancreatitis, and hypothyroidism They
require treatment. Hypercholesterolemia from high dietary intake requires
modification of eating habits and possibly medication to retard absorption.

Hypercholesterolemia can occur from taking adrenocorticotropic hormone,
corticosteroids, androgens, bile salts, epinephrine, chlorpromazine,
trifluoperazine, oral contraceptives, salicylates, thiouracils, and trimetha- dione.

Low serum cholesterol (/xypocholesterolerma) is associated with malnutrition,
cellular necrosis of the liver, and hyperthyroidism Cholesterol often drops
below normal in the Gerson program, because patients are eating an extremely
low-fat diet.

THE LIPOPROTEIN/CHOLESTEROL
FRACTIONATION LABORATORY TEST

To assess the risk of coronary artery disease, the lipoprotein/cholesterol
fractionation laboratory test is conducted. By centrifugation or elec trophoresis,
it isolates and measures the cholesterol in blood, which appears as low-density
lipoproteins (LDL) and high-density lipoproteins (HDL). It’s known that a
lower HDL level in the population gives rise to a higher incidence of CAD.
Conversely, higher HDL levels produce a lesser amount of CAD.

Note: Since the Gerson Therapy offers a nunimal amount of fat, it often lowers the
nisk of coronary artery disease, but it does provide an adequate
supply of certain polyunsaturated essential fatty acids and fat-soluble vitamins that
cannot be synthesized in adequate amounts for optimal body function.

Normal HDL cholesterol ranges from 29 to 77 mg/100 mL of blood, and
normal LDL cholesterol ranges from 62 to 185 mg/100 mL. Too-high LDL
levels increases the risk of CAD, while elevated HDL generally reflects a
healthy state. Or it might indicate chronic hepatitis, early-stage primary biliary
cirrhosis, or too much alcohol consumption.
286 THE GERSON THERAPY

THE SERUM TRIGLYCERIDES LABORATORY TEST
Triglycerides being the body's main storage form of lipids (constituting 95
percent of fatty tissue), the serum triglycerides laboratory test provides a
quantitative analysis of them It identifies /ryerlipenna in kidney disease and
CAD. The triglyceride values vary according to age:

Age Trigyceride Values

mg/dl nmol/L
0-29 10-140 0.1-1.55
30-39 10-150 0.1-1.65
40-49 10-160 0.1-1.75
50-59 10-190 0.1-2.10

Test abnormality suggests that other measurements are needed. High
triglycerides indicate the risk of atherosclerosis or CAD. Mild-to-moderate
levels advise of biliary obstruction, diabetes, kidney disease, endocrin-
opathies, or too much consumption of alcohol. Decreased levels are rare but
may show malnutrition or a betalipoproteinemia.

Note: On the Gerson diet, flare-ups and healing reactions are shown by elevated
trighycendes.

THE SERUM PROTEIN ELECTROPHORESIS LABORATORY TEST

The major blood proteins of the body, albumin and four globulins, are
measured in an electric field by separating them into patterns according to size,
shape, and electric charge at pH 8.6. Comprising more than 50 percent of total
serum protein, albumin prevents leakage of capillary plasma by oncotic
pressure (the pressure exerted by plasma proteins on the capillary wall), and it
transports the many water-insoluble substances such as bilirubin, fatty acids,
hormones, and drugs. Of the four globulins, alpha}, alpha2, beta, and gamma,
the first three act as carrier proteins for transporting lipids, hormones, and
metals through the blood, and the fourth, gamma globulin, acts in and upon
the immune system.

As indicated by its label, the serum protein electrophoresis laboratory test
uses electric current to measure the total serum protein and albumin- globulin
ratio to convert them into absolute values. These values help to uncover the
presence of liver disease, blood dyscrasias, kidney disorders, gastrointestinal
illnesses, neoplastic (benign and malignant) diseases, and/or protein
deficiency. Here are the normal blood serum ranges for these proteins:

Total serum protein 6.6 to 7.9 g/dL
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 287

Albumin fraction 3.3 to 4.5 g/dL
Alpha? globulin fraction 0.1 to 0.4 g/dL
Alpha? globulin 0.5 to 1.0 g/dL
Beta globulin 0.7 to1.2¢/dL
Gammaglobulin 0.5 to 1.6 g/dL

The balance between total albumin and total globulin (known in medicine as
the A-G ratio) is evaluated in relation to the total protein level. A reversed A-G
ratio (decreased albumin and elevated globulins) and low total protein shows
chronic liver disease; reversed A-G ratio with normal total protein shows
myeloproliferative disease (leukemia and Hodgkin's disease) or certain chronic
infectious diseases (tuberculosis and chronic hepatitis).

THE BLOOD UREA NITROGEN (BUN) LABORATORY TEST

Measurement of the blood’s nitrogen fraction of urea, the chief product of
protein metabolism, is accomplished by the blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
laboratory test. Formed in the liver from ammonia and excreted by the kidneys,
urea constitutes 40 to 50 percent of the blood’s nonprotein nitrogen. The BUN
level reflects protein intake and kidney excretory capacity, but it’s a less reliable
indicator of uremia (urine in the blood) than the serum creatinine level (see the
test description which immediately follows).

With normal values ranging from 8 to 20 mg/dL, the BUN test helps to
evaluate kidney function, aids in the diagnosis of kidney illness, and assesses
the body’s hydration. An elevated BUN happens in reduced renal blood flow
from dehydration, renal disease, urinary tract obstruction, and increased
protein catabolism as in burns. Depressed BUN levels occur in severe liver
damage, malnutrition, and overhydration.

Note: Due to imtial decreased dietary protein intake, a person following the Gerson
Therapy will likely show a slightly reduced level of BUN

THE SERUM CREATININE LABORATORY TEST

Providing a more sensitive measure of kidney damage than the BUN, the
serum creatinine laboratory test is a quantitative analysis of the nonprotein end
product of metabolism, creatinine. Kidney impairment is virtually the only
cause of creatinine elevation in the blood; therefore, creatinine levels are
directly related to the glomerular filtration rate. They assess renal glomerular
function and screen for kidney damage.

Creatinine concentration in males normally ranges from 0.8 to 1.2 mg/dL; in
females it ranges from 0.6 to 0.9 mg/dL. Elevation of serum creatinine means
288 THE GERSON THERAPY
that serious renal disease is present with 50 percent damaged nephrons as in

gigantism and acromegaly. Interfering factors are too much absorption of
ascorbic acid, barbiturates, diuretics, and sulfobro- mophthalein. Also, athletes
may have above-average creatinine levels, even with normal kidney function.

THE SERUM URIC ACID LABORATORY TEST

Used mainly to detect gout, the serum uric acid laboratory test measures
levels of uric acid, a metabolite of purine in the blood. Glomerular filtration and
tubular secretion gets rid of uric acid, but it’s less soluble at a pH of 7.4 or lower
which occurs in certain diseases such as gout, excessive cellular generation and
destruction as in leukemia, and kidney dysfunction.

Uric acid concentrations in men range from 4.3 to 8 mg/dL; in women they
range from 2.3 to 6 mg/dL. Although elevated levels of serum uric acid don’t
correlate with severity of disease, they do rise in congestive heart failure,
glycogen storage disease, acute infectious diseases such as infectious
mononucleosis, hemolytic anemia, sickle cell anemia, hemoglobinopathies,
polycythemia, leukemia, lymphoma, metastatic malignancy, and psoriasis.
Depressed uric acid levels indicate defective acute hepatic atrophy or tubular
absorption as in Wilson's disease and Fanconi’s syndrome.

Drug factors interfering in the serum uric acid laboratory test include loop
diuretics, ethambutol, vincristine, pyrazinamide, thiazides, and low doses of
salicylates which elevate blood levels. Also, starvation, a high purine diet,
stress, and alcohol abuse raise uric acid. When uric acid is measured by the
colorimetric method, false elevations come from acetaminophen, ascorbic acid,
levodopa, and phenacetin. Decreased uric acid is caused by high doses of
aspirin, Coumadin, clofibrate, cinchophen, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and
phenothiazines.

THE GLUCOSE, FASTING BLOOD SUGAR (FBS) LABORATORY

TEST

Following a 12- to 14-hour fast, the glucose, fasting blood sugar (FBS)
laboratory test measures glucose metabolism as required in diabetes mellitus.
In the fasting state, blood glucose levels decrease, stimulating release of the
hormone glucagon. Glucagon then raises plasma glucose by accelerating
glycogenolysis, stimulating glyconeogenesis, and inhibiting glycogen synthesis.
Normally, secretion of insulin checks this rise in glucose levels. In diabetes,
absence or deficiency of insulin allows persistently high glucose levels.

Normal ranges for fasting blood glucose on the FBS laboratory test after an
eight- to twelve-hour fast are:
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 289

* fasting serum, 70 to 100 mg/dL;

¢ fasting whole blood, 60 to 100 mg/dL;

* nonfasting whole blood, 85 to 125 mg/dL in persons over age 50, and 70
to 115 mg/dL in persons under age 50.

These laboratory readings help to screen for diabetes mellitus and other
disorders of glucose metabolism. They also monitor drug or dietary therapy for
diabetics, insulin requirements for uncontrolled diabetics, and known or
suspected hypoglycemics.

Fasting blood glucose levels of 140 to 150 mg/dL or higher obtained on two
or more occasions are diagnostic of diabetes mellitus. Nonfasting levels that
exceed 200 mg/dL also show diabetes. The elevated blood glucose may come
from pancreatitis, hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma, chronic hepatic
disease, brain trauma, chronic illness, chronic malnutrition, eclampsia, anoxia,
and convulsive disorders as well.

Depressed blood glucose occurs from hyperinsulinism, insulinoma, von
Gierke’s disease, functional or reactive hypoglycemia, hypothyroidism, adrenal
insufficiency, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hypopituitarism, islet cell
carcinoma of the pancreas, hepatic necrosis, and glycogen storage disease.

THE SERUM IRON AND TOTAL IRON- BINDING
CAPACITY LABORATORY TEST

Two separate blood tests conducted with buffering and coloring reagents
measure (1) the amount of iron bound to the glycoprotein transferrin and (2)
the plasma’s total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) if all the transferrin were
saturated with iron. The percentage of saturation is obtained by dividing the
serum iron result by the TIBC, which reveals the actual amount of saturated
transferrin. Normal transferrin is 30 percent saturated. Thus, the two tests (a)
estimate total iron storage, (b) diagnose hemochromatosis, (c) distinguish
between iron deficiency anemia and chronic disease anemia, and (d) evaluate a
person's nutritional status.

Normal serum iron and TIBC values have been determined to be:

Serum Iron TIBC (mcg/dL) Saturation (mcg/dL)
Mem 70 to 150 300 to 400 20 to 50
Women: 80 to 150 350 to 450 20 to 50

In iron deficiency, serum iron falls and TIBC increases to decrease the
saturation. With chronic inflammation as in rheumatoid arthritis, serum iron is
low in the presence of adequate body stores, but TIBC remains unchanged or
drops to preserve normal saturation. Iron overload does not alter serum levels
until relatively late in the pathology, but serum iron increases and TIBC
290 THE GERSON THERAPY

remains the same to increase the saturation.

The Erythrocyte (Red Blood Cell, RBC) Count

Traditionally counted by hand with a hemacytometer, red blood cells (RBCs)
are now commonly counted with electronic devices, which provide faster, more
accurate results. This erythrocyte count does not provide qualitative
information about the RBCs’ hemoglobin content, but it does tell mean
corpuscular volume (MCV) and mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH). Thus,
the erythrocyte blood count offers indices for RBC size and hemoglobin content
and supports other hematologic tests in diagnosing anemia and polycythemia.

Depending on age, sex, sample, and geographic location, normal RBC values
in adult males range from 4.5 to 6.2 million/microliter (4.5 to 6.2 x 1,012/L) of
venous blood; in adult females from 4.2 to 5.4 million/microliter (4.2 to 5.4 x
1,012/L) of venous blood; in children, 4.6 to 4.8 million/microliter of venous
blood; in full-term infants, 4.4 to 5.8 million/ microliter (4.4 to 5.8 x 1,012/L).
An elevated RBC count indicates polycythemia or dehydration; a depressed
count shows anemia, fluid overload, or recent hemorrhage. With total bed rest,
RBC counts drop considerably from decreased oxygen requirements.

THE TOTAL HEMOGLOBIN (HGB) LABORATORY TEST

The total hemoglobin (Hgb) concentration in a deciliter (100ml) of whole
blood is measured by the total hemoglobin laboratory test. The Hgb-RBC ratio
(mean corpuscular hemoglobin or MCI I) and free plasma Hgb affect the RBC
count. This test, a usual part of the complete blood count, measures the severity
of anemia or polycythemia, monitors therapy response, and supplies figures for
calculating MCH and mean corpuscular Hgb concentration.

Based on venous blood samples, normal values for different patients are:

Age Hemoglobin Level (g/dL)
Less than 7 days 17-22
1 week 15-20

1 month 11-15
291
Gerson Lab Tests Explained

Hemoglobin Level (g/dL)

Children 11-13
Adult males 1418
Elderly males 12.4149
Adult females 1216
Elderly females 11.7-13.8

THE HEMATOCRIT (HCT) LABORATORY TEST

The volume of RBCs packed in a whole blood sample is measured by the
hematocrit (Hct) laboratory test. Number and size of the RBCs determine the
Hct concentration, and such a readout aids in the diagnosis of abnormal states
of hydration, polycythemia, anemia, fluid imbalance, blood loss, blood
replacement, and red cell indices. According to a patient's sex, age, laboratory
competence, and type of blood sample, the test routinely screens one’s blood in
acomplete blood count.

Hct reference values range from 40 percent to 54 percent (0.4 to 0.54) for men
and from 37 percent to 47 percent (0.37 to 0.47) for women. Low Hct indicates
anemia or hemodilution; high Hct shows polycythemia or hemoconcentration
caused by blood loss. If a hematoma develops at the venipuncture site, ease
discomfort by applying ice, followed later by warm soaks.

THE ERYTHROCYTE INDICES LABORATORY TEST

Mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH),
and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) are the three
measurements accomplished by the erythrocyte indices laboratory test. The
MCV expresses the average size of erythrocytes and indicates whether they are
undersized (microcytic), oversized (macrocytic), or normal (normocytic). MCH
gives the weight of hemoglobin in an average red cell MCHC defines the
concentration of Hgb in 100 mL of packed red cells.

The normal RBC indices are:
MCV =84 to 99 cubic microliters /red cell (femtoliters (fl)/red cell) MCH =
26 to 32 picograms (pg)/red cell MCHC = 30% to 36% (300 to 360 g/L)

These indices aid in diagnosing and classifying anemia. Low MCV and
MCHC show microcytic hypochromic anemias caused by iron deficiency
anemia, pyridoxine-responsive anemia, or thalassemia. High MCV indicates
292 THE GERSON THERAPY

macrocytic anemia caused by megaloblastic anemias coming from folic acid
or vitamin By deficiency, inherited disorders of DNA synthesis, or
reticulocytosis.

THE ERYTHROCYTE SEDIMENTATION RATE (ESR)

Measuring the time required for erythrocytes in a whole blood sample to
settle to the bottom of a vertical tube, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
is a sensitive but nonspecific test that indicates the presence of disease when
other chemical or physical signs are normal It rises in widespread
inflammatory disorders caused by infection, autoimmune disease, or
malignancy.

Thus, the ESR monitors inflammatory or malignant illness and detects occult
disease such as tuberculosis (TB), tissue necrosis, or connective tissue disorders.
The normal ESR ranges from 0 to 20 mm/hour. It rises in pregnancy, acute or
chronic inflammation, TB, paraproteinemias, rheumatic fever, rheumatoid
arthritis, and some cancers. ESR also rises in anemia. ESR drops in
polycythemia, sickle cell anemia, hyperviscosity, and low plasma protein.

Note: ESR is frequently raised during and after reactions and fevers induced by the
Gerson Therapy.

THE PLATELET COUNT

Platelets, or thrombocytes, are tiny formed elements in the blood which
create the hemostatic plug in vascular injury. They promote coagulation by
supplying phospholipids to the intrinsic thromboplastin pathway. The platelet
count is vital for monitoring chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or severe
thrombocytosis and thrombocytopenia. A platelet count that falls below 50,000
brings on spontaneous bleeding; below 5,000, fatal central nervous system
bleeding or massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage is possible.

The platelet count evaluates platelet production, assesses effects of cytotoxic
therapy, aids the diagnosing of thrombocytopenia and thrombocytosis, and
confirms visual estimate of platelet number and morphology from a stained
blood film Normal platelet counts range from 130,000 to 370,000/mm (130 to
370 x 10'VL).

A decreased count comes from aplastic or hypoplastic bone marrow; in-
filtrative bone marrow diseases like carcinoma, leukemia, or disseminated
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 293

infection; megakaryocytic hypoplasia; ineffective thrombopoiesis caused by
folic acid or vitamin B, deficiency; pooling of platelets in an enlarged spleen;
increased platelet destruction from drug use or immune disorders;
disseminated intravascular coagulation; Bernard-Soulier syndrome; or
mechanical injury to platelets.

Medications decreasing the count include acetazolamid, acetohexam- Ide,
antimony, antineoplastics, brompheniramine maleate, carbamazepine,
chloramphenicol, ethacrynic acid, furosemide, gold salts, hydroxychloroquine,
indomethacin, isoniazid, mephenytoin, mefenamic acid, metha- zolamide,
methimazole, methyidopa, oral diaoxide, oxyphenbetazone, penicillamine,
penicillin, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, pyrimethamine, quinidine sulfate,
quinine, salicylates, streptomycin, sulfonamides, thiazide, thiazidelike diuretics,
and tricyclic antidepressants. Heparin causes transient reversible
thrombocytopenia.

An increased platelet count results from such diseases as hemorrhage;
infectious disorders; malignancies; iron deficiency anemia; myelofibrosis;
primary thrombocytosis; polycythemia vera; myelogenous leukemia; recent
surgery, pregnancy, or splenectomy; and inflammatory disorders, such as
collagen vascular disease.

THE LEUKOCYTE (WHITE BLOOD CELL, WBC) COUNT

Reporting on the number of white blood cells (WBCs) found in a microliter
(cubic millimeter) of whole blood by use of a hemacytometer or Coulter
counter, the leukocyte count varies with strenuous exercise, stress, or digestion.
It’s used to detect infection or inflammation, the need for further tests such as
the WBC differential or bone marrow biopsy, and the response to
chemotherapy or radiation therapy.

The WEC count ranges from 4.1 to 10.9 x 10". An elevated count signals
infection such as an abscess, meningitis, appendicitis, or tonsillitis, and it may
indicate leukemia, tissue necrosis from burns, myocardial infarction, or
gangrene. A low count shows bone marrow depression from viral infections or
from toxic reactions such as those following treatment with antineoplastics,
mercury or other heavy metal toxicity, benzene or arsenic exposure, and
invasion by the organisms of influenza, typhoid fever, measles, infectious
hepatitis, mononucleosis, and rubella.

THE WHITE BLOOD CELL DIFFERENTIAL

Being a relative number of each type of white blood cell, the white blood cell
differential test is determined by multiplying the percentage value of each
294 THE GERSON THERAPY
WEC type to give an absolute number of each kind of the 100 or more WBCs.

There are granulocytes, agranulocytes, juvenile neutrophils, segmented
neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, large lymphocytes, small lymphoctyes,
phagocytes, histiocytes, and so on.

The WBC differential evaluates the body's capacity to resist and overcome
infection, various types of leukemia, the stage and severity of infection, allergic
reactions, severity of allergic reactions, and parasitic infections. There is a long
list of reference values in the WBC differential test, divided into adult and
child. For example some of them are:

For Adults Relative Value (%) Absolute Value (mcL)
Neutrophils 47 6-76.8 1950-8,400
Lymphocytes 16.2-43 660-4,600
Monocytes 0.69.6 24-960
Eosinophils 0.3-7 12-760
Basophils 0.3-2 12-200

To make an accurate diagnosis, the test examiner must consider both
relative and absolute values of the differential counts. For the vast number of
variables and illnesses which are diagnosed by them, please see Appendix I of
the Gerson Therapy Handbook. Companion Workbook to A Cancer Therapy. Results of
Fifty Cases: Practical Guidance, Resources and Recipes for Gerson Therapy Patients.
To acquire a copy of this handbook/workbook, contact the Gerson Institute, in
Bonita, California.

THE ROUTINE URINALYSIS

Elements of routine urinalysis include the measurement evaluations of
physical characteristics, specific gravity and pH, protein, glucose, and ketone
bodies, plus examination of urine sediment, casts, and blood cell crystals. The
analysis of urine is an exceedingly important test that tells a lot about the
internal workings of a person. Routine urine test results have a great number of
implications for how the physiology is functioning or how it is responding to
the diet, non pathologic conditions, specimen collection time, and other factors.

For the vast number of variables and illnesses which are evaluated by
urinalysis, please see Appendix I of the Gerson Therapy Handbook Companion
Workbook to A Cancer Therapy. Results of Fifty Cases: Practical Guidance, Resources
and Recipes for Gerson™ Therapy Patients. To acquire a copy of this
handbook/ workbook, contact the Gerson Institute in San Diego, California.
Cerson Lab Tests Explained 295

Chapter Twenty-One

SUCCESS STORIES BY
PATIENTS

Ws in the Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients, medical an-
thropologist Tim Batchelder advises that people do not arrive at health
care systems for diagnosis and treatments; rather, they come to find wellness
and wholeness.

People often feel symptoms and even exhibit signs of illness when they seek
the services of a doctor or clinic but return home labeled with a disease. Other
medical anthropologists call such a result the “veterinary practice of medicine”
since the patient's experience of illness becomes irrelevant except as it reveals
an underlying presence of disease. A patient's opinions, beliefs and other
aspects of socio-cultural identity only cloud the doctor’s mind-set.2 Preferable
for some technically oriented and conventionally practicing health
professionals is that the patient be passive like a sedated animal in a
veterinarian’ s clinic.

Not so the situations for Gerson patients whose case histories of chronic
illness you're about to read. They have been far from passive or sedated;
instead these people actively sought out the Gerson Therapy and practiced it—
this despite knowing their selected approach to wellness offers a difficult,
highly restrictive, and isolating lifestyle. The goal for each of these folks has
been to live as close as possible to the full complement of mankind's allotted
296 THE GERSON THERAPY
years. The Gerson Therapy has been allowing them to reach that goal.

REVERSING LATE-STAGE LUNG CANCER

To his shock and dismay, in November 1989, sixty-year-old John Peters of
Pittsburgh was diagnosed with lung cancer—an adenocarcinoma. Although he
had eaten a good diet, swam a thousand yards in his swimming pool five days
each week, never smoked, and had been given an excellent health report by his
doctor just three months before, Mr. Peters still had come down with non-
small-cell carcinoma of the lung, staged at level IIA by his consulting
oncologist.

Lung Cancer is the second most common cancer and the number-one cause
of death from malignancy in both men and women. Although there has always
been a higher incidence in men, lung cancer in women has risen rapidly in
recent years. While lung cancer has long been the top cancer killer of men, it
has now surpassed breast cancer as the main malignancy killer of women.

In 1997, 178,100 Americans developed lung cancer, and 160,400 died of it.
This high incidence of death is true even though lung cancer is the most
preventable of malignancies; if every bit of tobacco were removed from the
earth, the number of all cancer types (not only those affecting the ling) would
fall by 17 percent. Of the two general kinds of lung cancer, small-cell and non-
small-cell, the latter is more common, accounting for approximately 75 percent
of all diagnosed cases.

Conventional oncological treatment of lung cancer, which primarily
depends on surgery with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and sometimes
hyperthermia, has offered a poor prognosis for remaining alive over a pro-
longed period of time.

* The success rate for five-year survival of stage I lung cancer (no spread to
lymph nodes) is 30 to 80 percent because the tumor is tiny in size and
surgery removes it.

* The success rate for five-year survival of stage II lung cancer (spread to
the hilar nodes) is 10 to 35 percent with both surgery and radiation
therapy administered. (Hilar nodes are those lung indentations where
arteries enter and veins and lymphatics leave.)

* The success rate for five-year survival of stage IIA lung cancer (surgery
is possible combined with radiation therapy and _ occasional
chemotherapy) is 10 to 15 percent.

¢ The success rate for five-year survival of stage IIB lung cancer (surgery
offers no benefit; radiation therapy and experimental
chemotherapy may be attempted) is less than 5 percent because usual
Success Stories By Patients 297

orthodox oncological treatments truly fail the patients.

* The success rate for five-year survival of stage IV lung cancer (metastases
to distant sites) is considerably less than 5 percent— perhaps only 3
percent—for treatment usually is directed merely toward relieving

symptoms.

Non-smail-cell lung cancer, spreading by the lymphatic system and through
the blood, contains three distinct types: squamous-cell or epidermoid
carcinoma of the lung (most related to smoking), large-cell carcinoma
(associated with brain metastasis), and adenocarcinoma. For no known reason,
adenocarcinoma has steadily increased in frequency (above 30 percent of all
lung cancers). Treatment is similar for these three nonsmall-cell lung cancer
types.

Upon an emergency recommendation of his consulting oncologist, John
Peters underwent immediate open-chest surgery, followed by twenty- four
radiation treatments. Thus, his various symptoms consisting of constant cough,
sometimes containing blood, hoarseness and shortness of breath, excessive
sputum, recurrent episodes of lung infection, weight loss, and swelling of the
face, plus the sense of overwhelming fatigue, lessened to the point of almost
disappearing.

A year later, however, the patient's original coughing and some of his other
symptoms recurred. Another series of diagnostic tests, including bronchoscopic
examination, revealed that he again required chest surgery for excising the non-
small-cell lung cancer. “When I refused surgery and chemotherapy, the doctors
told me that there was no chance for my survival at all,” John Peters explained.

“Thad researched lung cancer and realized that the only reason I got cancer
was that my body supported it. Thus, if I didn’t change the internal
environment of my body, the cancer would just come back again. In May
1991,1 started on the Gerson Therapy at home,” said Mr. Peters. “I was very
weak, and this Gerson Therapy was demanding, but I was facing the Grim
Reaper, so 1 was also highly motivated.

‘In only three weeks, I knew the Gerson treatment was working—I was
getting stronger, coughing less, and feeling much better. Most surprising, I was
actually gaining weight on this vegetarian diet. After losing so many pounds
the months before, I was finally becoming more than just skin and bones,” Mr.
Peters wrote in a letter to the Gerson Institute. “I have remained cancer-free
and in good health for the past seven years. I am vegan, avoid refined flour,
sugar, salt, caffeine and alcohol and still press vegetables and drink their juices,
about twenty-four ounces per day. There is no doubt in my mind that I would
have been in the cemetery six or seven years ago without the Gerson Therapy.

‘Incidentally, before going through my 1989 lung removal surgery, I had
298 THE GERSON THERAPY

obtained a second opinion from the head of the Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.
When I returned to him for a follow-up cancer test in 1996, he was shocked to
see me surviving. The lung surgeon told me that I'd never know how lucky I
was to be alive and that with my disease, there was only about a 3 percent
chance of five-year survival. Eating the Gerson vegetarian way has saved my
life,’ John Peters confirmed.

At his latest report to this book’s two authors, as a former lung cancer
patient who subscribes rather closely to the eating program of the Gerson
Therapy, John Peters has gone well beyond doubling the usual cancer patient's
five-year survival time for adenocarinoma of the lung. (As you've been
informed, five-year survival of any cancer is defined by the American Cancer
Society as a “cure.”

A TWENTY-YEAR CURE OF INOPERABLE STAGE 111B LUNG

CANCER

In mid-January 1979, Jesus Lechuga Valdez of Durango, Mexico, returned
from a business trip to Mexico City with a severe cold. A week later it had
deteriorated into a persistent cough and lingering hoarseness that made it
difficult for him to speak. Senor Lechuga, who, at this writing, is eighty-six
years old, in 1971 had retired from his position as general manager and partial
owner of a truck and tractor dealership. His travels for business had been
successful but hard on the man’s body. During the next six months, his chronic
cough and hoarse voice were treated by three allopathic physicians and a
homeopath, all of whom thought such signs of illness came from adult-onset
asthma. At that time he was sixty-six years old.

The doctors’ diagnosis and treatment were incorrect, for X-ray films
eventually taken of Senor Lechuga’s thoracic area showed a 5-centimeter (cm)
round spot in the upper region of his right lung. A chest surgeon he consulted
confirmed the existence of a lung tumor 2!) inches across.

Since an El Paso, Texas, internist, Walter D. Feinberg, M.D., had been
keeping annual records of the patient's physical examinations, on June 18, 1979,
Senor Lechuga traveled to Dr. Feinberg’s office for comparing previous and
current radiographs. It turns out that there had been no sign of the potential for
a chest lesion the year before. Within half a dozen months, therefore, his mass
had formed spontaneously and quickly.

Pulmonologist E. S$. Crossett, M.D., at El Paso’s Hotel Dieu (French for
“God's house’) Hospital performed a bronchioscopy and mediastinoscopy
during lung surgery to remove the tumor. But because excision would have left
his patient too weak, the surgeon decided not to remove the tumor and only
Success Stories By Patients 299

performed a biopsy. The resulting tissue pathology and instrumentation
reports indicated that Senor Lechuga was victimized by stage IIB “large cell
undifferentiated carcinoma with metastasis to the bronchial and mediastinal
areas.”

Staging in cancer terminology is a relative index of how much cancer exists
in an individual's body, including its size, location, and containment or
metastasis.? Stage III indicates that metastases have spread the cancer to areas
other than the primary site. In lung cancer, stage III is divided into two types,
IIA and IIIB. Stage IIB lung cancer classifies the tumor as not removable
because of technical reasons relating to the surgical technique or because there
would be no benefit to the patient.4 The several malignant metastases of Jesus
Lechuga Valdez were declared inoperable, and his prognosis became
established at only three to six months of life remaining.

High-Dosage Radiation Exposure for

Senor Lechuga

Consultation with oncologist Ira A. Horowitz, M.D., medical director of the
El Paso Cancer Treatment Center, followed. Dr. Horowitz emphatically
recommended radiation therapy, but the machine used for this external
radiation failed to be state-of-the-art; its old-fashioned cobalt-60 electron beams
would present the patient with some awful side effects. The machine’s
radioactive source was housed in a lead container, and as the cobalt isotope
decayed, it produced a beam in the megavoltage range.5

With advice from his family, Senor Lechuga decided instead that he would
take radiation therapy in Chester, Pennsylvania, close to the Wilmington,
Delaware, home of his daughter, Georgina Lechuga Potter. (Mrs. Potter, who
now lives in Vienna, Virginia, acted as translator for her father’s Spanish-
spoken case history. Besides hospital records, she is a main source of the
information you are reading. The patient's wife, Dolores A. Lechuga, signed the
permission form to release this story.)

From Wilmington, Mrs. Potter brought her father to consult with oncologist
Robert Enck, M.D., located at the Crozer-Chester Medical Center in Chester. He
confirmed the need for radiation therapy. Upon Dr. Enck’s referral, radiologist
Warren Sewall, M.D., from July 10 to August 21, 1979, used a linear accelerator
to administer radiation doses of 4,400 rads (the modern dosage term is centigray
[cGy]) to the right lung and mediastinum for four weeks. The patient also
received 1,600 rads to the upper lobe of the right lung plus 5,000 rads
simultaneously to cancer- filled “supraclavicular nodules.” He took this high-
energy therapy five days per week for four weeks. Then the radiologist added
another 5,000 rads to those supraclavicular nodules for two additional weeks.

The linear accelerator, one of the most popular machines now being used, was
300 THE GERSON THERAPY

truly state-of-the-art back in 1979. It is available in energies ranging from 4 to 3
5 megavolts and uses a mixed beam of X rays and electrons. Electrons are
accelerated along a wave guide to their high velocity. Penetration into tissue is
determined by the energy of the beam selected.°

With the object of relieving his symptoms (not curing the cancer), Jesus
Lechuga Valdez underwent multiple exposures to the hospital's linear
accelerator’s high-energy X rays. They were responsible for certain dis-
comforting side effects and may be responsible for cancer to have appeared
currently, twenty years later. The massive amount of X rays given then to
normal tissue supposedly never exceeded safe doses.

Through a process of “ionization,” the radiation is designed to kill some
cancer cells by damaging their chromosomes and DNA to stop cell division. Of
the centigray dose, one gray equals 100 rads, so that Senor Lechuga each day
actually received 44 cGy plus 16 cGy plus 50 cGy for a four-week total of 2,200
cGy, and then he accepted another 1,000 cGy for two weeks more. The 3,200
cGy dosage is enormous and, as you will learn later, such radiation therapy
held significance for the man’s future health prospects.

The beam’s adverse effects caused Senor Lechuga to experience mental
depression, loss of appetite, serious weight loss, darkening of the skin in the
irradiated chest area, and difficulty swallowing from esophageal scarring that
resulted from the radiation burns he sustained. Even today, almost twenty-one
years later, he must swallow carefully because he can be choked by an overly
large food particle getting stuck at the esophageal scar site.

By means of follow-up diagnostics back at the El Paso Cancer Treatment
Center, on August 31, 1979, Dr. Horowitz confirmed that his patient's lung
tumor had been reduced by about 80 percent. The coughing fits were less
strong and not striking Senor Lechuga as often; his appetite had returned; and
the annoying hoarseness improved. Throughout his examinations and
treatments, the doctors put no dietary restrictions on him whatsoever,
permitting Danish pastries, fatty hamburgers, french fried potatoes, pizza, cola
drinks, and other assorted junk. He was told merely to avoid sunlight directly
on his irradiated skin areas.

When pressed for a prognosis as the result of radiation therapy received, Dr.
Horowitz gave him an estimated 50 percent chance of either having a lung
cancer recurrence or living somewhat longer. It was then that the man returned
home to Durango and resumed working in his truck and tractor dealership.

Lung Cancer Returns

Less than a month after conclusion of the radiation, his cancer came back.
Coughing spells and hoarseness returned worse than ever for Senor Lechuga. It
was then that he and Dolores decided to act upon information about the Gerson
Success Stories By Patients 301

Therapy provided by their daughter, Georgina Lechuga Potter. Her friend,
practicing pharmacist Irwin Rosenberg, Ph.D. (a doctorate in nutrition),
acquired information and taught Mrs. Potter about healing cancer using Dr.
Max Gerson’s dietary/detoxification program. Dr. Rosenberg is owner of the
Apothecary Pharmacy on Georgetown Road in Bethesda, Maryland (ironically,
located across from the National Institutes of Health).

On October 28, 1979, Senor Lechuga accompanied by his wife arrived at the
Gerson Therapy hospital in Tyuana, Mexico. Victor Ortuno, M.D., the hospital's
medical director, initially examined the patient and then turned the Lechuga
case over to his cousin, Arturo Ortuno, M.D., who took full responsibility for
supervising treatment.

Although very uncomfortable from his numerous healing reactions, Senor
Lechuga’s physical response was rapidly positive. His cancer markers and
other laboratory tests improved; however, his state of mind hit bottom—
depression set in. Still, from Dr. Arturo Ortuno’s efforts and with much
encouragement from Dolores Lechuga, Senor Lechuga stayed on the
dietary / detoxification program at the Gerson hospital and then later at home.

On his own back in Durango, Senor Lechuga struggled with tolerating the

many glasses of Gerson juices, coffee enemas, castor oil treatments, salads, and
eating the well-done and unsalted foods. The Gerson diet was contrary to his
Mexican cultural background and abhorrent to his psyche.
During healing reactions, appetite left him completely, and such reactions came
on frequently for prolonged periods. Sometimes they lasted for a week, but the
love and support of Dolores, his companion for life, prevailed over his
discouragement. Dolores prepared the foods, juices, enemas, and other healing
components; she became his self-contained caregiver and the household's
Gerson therapist. In effect, his wife saved the life of Senor Lechuga.

By the week between Christmas and New Years day of 1980, his healing
flare-ups diminished, and he began to feel better. However, the man did
experience extreme weakness and had to force himself to eat anything at all. He
preferred to do nothing more than rest in bed and sleep frequently. In another
week he made enough progress to return to work part-time and sporadically.
Sitting at his desk gave him a renewed will to fight his cancer with all his
might. With an office a mere five minutes by car from home, the patient went
home for coffee enema cleansings, to eat his meals, and to drink the green
juices. He carried carrot juice in a thermos with him to work for hourly
drinking.

By the end of April 1980, the patient traveled to the Gerson hospital once
again for his first six-month checkup. (In all, after November 1979, he returned
to that hospital for semiannual examinations twelve times.) His cancer markers
and blood tests showed a near-normal physiology so that the Gerson diet was
302 THE GERSON THERAPY

modified by Dr. Arturo Ortuna, who after eight weeks had included yogurt, rye
bread, raw skimmed milk, infrequent meals of fish, chicken, and a few other
items heretofore forbidden. Senor Lechuga was feeling better and better, and
his mental outlook became optimistic. He told stories, joked, sang, and became
ajoy to everyone around him.

Having reported his progress to Charlotte Gerson during the weekend of
October 17 and 18, 1981, he accepted her invitation to participate as a speaker in
San Diego at a “Gerson Survivors’ Conference.” In June 1985, Dr. Arturo
Ortuno traveled with Senior Lechuga to a San Diego diagnostic center for him
to undergo a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to confirm that after five years
his cancer had completely cleared. It had! Receiving the affirmative MRI report,
Dr. A. Ortuno declared his patient officially cured of cancer and asked him to
return to the Gerson Hospital in one year for another checkup. Then the doctor
suggested that lie go back to the very restrictive Gerson Therapy for just one
month more as a kind of “insurance” toward his cure. This Senor Lechuga
agreed to do along with promising that he would report results of his following
the difficult lifestyle for a final month that’s demanded by the therapy.

When the patient telephoned Dr. Arturo Ortuno that single month later to
report on the experience, he learned that his forty-year-old physician had just
died and was being buried. While Dr. A. Ortuno had been playing hard at
racquetball with Dr. Victor Ortuno the day before, he suffered a massive heart
attack. He succumbed in his cousin’s arms.

Shocked by the terrible news, Senor Lechuga never returned to Tijuana.
Also, he markedly reduced his adherence to the Gerson Therapy. Although he
continued to consume a sensible diet, his juice intake fell to about four glasses
daily. During the fourteen years following, Jesus and Dolores Lechuga lived the
good life. They traveled extensively to Hawaii, Canada, Washington State, New
York City, and other places. They flew, cruised, drove, took train trips, and
went places all over North America.

Then, from July 25 to August 5, 1999, he enjoyed a cruise to Alaska to walk
on glaciers, hike mountain trails, and eat the multiple massive meals
Success Stories By Patients 303

Jesus Lechuga Valdez
served aboard ship. During this Alaskan excursion, the patient felt back pain
just below the right shoulder blade. Upon his return home, he was treated in
Durango by two medical doctors for a “contracted and knotted muscle” until
the lack of relief caused them to request a biopsy. The surgeon who did the
biopsy in Durango, J. Roberto Salas Gracia, M.D., reported that this muscle
“knot’ actually was a tumor. It was diagnosed as a malignant pleomorphic
fibrotic hystiocytoma in the soft tissue of the right shoulder blade. Because of
insufficient viable tissue surrounding the tumor unable to be biopsied, it
remains undetermined as to whether Senior Lechuga’s cancer is a malignant
schwannoma.

The malignant schwannoma is a sarcoma, one of the slow-growing tumors that
develop in soft tissue surrounding the nerve sheaths of smooth muscles. Some
75 percent of such sarcomas are called leiomyosarconus.

Receiving this diagnosis of malignancy in mid-October 1999, Senor and
Seiiora Lechuga and their daughter Georgina Potter immediately made
arrangements to admit him as a patient at the Gerson Therapy facility in
Tijuana. On October 25, 1999, he became a resident of the Oasis of Hope
Hospital. The attending clinician there, Jaime A. Martinez, M.D., advised that
such a cancer cannot be completely excised by surgery because the procedure
304 THE GERSON THERAPY

would negatively affect the use of his right arm. Dr. Martinez conjectured that
the new cancer might be a delayed adverse side effect of the original radiation
therapy that Senor Lechuga had undergone some twenty years before.

Three weeks after entering the Oasis Hospital, he left to follow the Gerson
Therapy at home. While the specific diagnosis of disease remained uncertain,
there was no doubt that this eighty-six-year-old man once again needed to fight
for his life—but with a different form of cancer. Then, during the last week of
November 1999, Senor Jesus Lechuga Valdez died suddenly of heart failure.
(See Illustration 21-2 depicting Senor Lechuga).

A FOURTEEN-YEAR RECOVERY FROM OVARIAN CANCER

In November 1999, while taking maintenance care at the Oasis Hospital, the
only official Gerson Therapy facility in Tijuana, Mexico, fifty- one-year-old
Sandra Whitwell, now of Stuart, Virginia, described her permanent recovery
from carcinoma of the ovary. Sandra currently works as a nanny and
nutritionist. Fourteen years ago ovarian cancer had threatened her life; today
she shares her story about using the Gerson Therapy to cure herself of the most
common gynecologic malignancy.

As the fourth most frequent cause of cancer death in American women,
ovarian cancer’s mortality rate exceeds that for all of the other gynecologic
malignancies combined. Every seventieth woman develops it, and 1 in every
100 dies from the tumorous growth at its primary site or from metastases.
Arising from cells covering the surface of an ovary (epithelial carcinoma), in
1997 in the United States 26,800 ovarian cancers were diagnosed, which caused
14,200 deaths. Subsequent years have shown even higher incidence. Despite all
of the money invested in research by American taxpayers, the incidence of
ovarian cancer is rising steadily.

Cancer of the ovary spreads by a shedding of malignant cells into the
abdominal cavity and the peritoneum (its covering membrane) and then
implanting on the surface of the liver, the large intestine, the omentum, the
small intestine, the bladder, the diaphragm, or the stomach’s attached fatty
tissue. Ovarian cancer cells also metastasize to lymph nodes in the pelvis, aorta,
groin, and neck. Talcum powder containing asbestos is suspected as one of the
probable causes.”

Sandra Whitwell’s ovarian cancer came upon her gradually starting with the
breakdown of her body when she was seventeen years old. Invariably her
menstrual periods were beset with unbearable cramps, and these carried over
to her early twenties when she married Lawrence Whitwell, a Nashville,
Tennessee, policeman. “My painful menstruation was abnormal and an
indication of ovarian problems to come,” advises Sandra. “By age twenty-three,
Success Stories By Patients 305

cysts had developed on both of my ovaries which were removed by surgery.
Next, endometriosis struck, which required more surgery to scrape the
endometrium. After each of these two operations I had been asked by the
consulting surgeons as to whether I had ever been pregnant, and I had not.
They never explained why they wanted to know about pregnancy, but the
doctors seemed anxious to perform an ovariectomy or hysterectomy on me.

“T never gave birth to a child. We adopted our son, Aaron, as a baby. But
then, when he was three years old his daddy was killed in the line of police
duty,” she reveals. “Ovarian cysts formed again, one of them the size of a
baseball, and these were excised. After recuperating from a third operation for
cyst removal, I had begun running for exercise —at least four miles a day. I
enjoyed the running and thrived on it. This vigorous daily movement
continued for me over an eight-year period. Early in 1985, however, running
stopped abruptly for me. I awakened one morning in tremendous pain and
with a distended fluid-filled abdomen [ascites], describes Sandra. “The
operation that followed for removal of a grape- fruit-sized cyst also included a
hysterectomy, which left me feeling awful pain. Two days later my
gynecologist together with the gynecological surgeon told me I was the victim
of ovarian cancer. They wanted to go back in and take biopsy tissue from the
ovaries and several other organs.

“Since blood transfusions were required as well, and this was during the
time when AIDS resulted from such transfusions, I refused the operation and
three pints of blood that went with it. Simultaneously, my health insurance
carrier did not honor our insurance contract. The insurance company just
outright canceled my coverage,” Sandra states. “Upon my contacting a lawyer
to enforce reimbursement, he informed me that a loophole in the policy
allowed such cancelation under terms stating that this ovarian cancer was a
‘preexisting condition.’ I was just out of luck unless I had lots of money to pay
court costs and legal fees for litigation without any guarantee I would win.

“Having no treatment available to me, I left the hospital after resting for
seven days diagnosed with ovarian cancer. At age thirty-six, I was alone, a
widow, the mother of a seven-year-old son showing diabetic tendencies, and
without income. Except that I owned my Nashville house and some small
compensation from my husband's death, I could not afford the sophisticated
chemotherapy or other toxic modalities being offered by orthodox medicine.
But I do have loving parents living in Stuart, Virginia, who would do anything
to save my life, and they were the people who did just that.

“My mother, who has nursed cancer patients, did research and helped me in
deciding to do nothing rather than take toxic therapy. With assistance from
mom and dad in caring for Aaron, I moved in with my parents. Then a friend
from Alaska sent me information about the Gerson Therapy,” Sandra says.
306 THE GERSON THERAPY

“Sitting with them in their living room, I remember watching videotapes
showing lectures by Charlotte Gerson. My mom said, ‘This program makes so
much sense, Feed the immune system and give it a chance to fight off the
cancer itself.’ So not having hospital insurance was a benefit, because I couldn't
even consider taking any conventional therapy.

“Accompanied by my mother as companion and caregiver, I traveled to
Tijuana’s Gerson Hospital. My intent was to receive the Gerson Therapy and
take instructions in following it at home. The trip occurred in September 1985,
exactly one month after my hysterectomy and cancer diagnosis. During that
short period before learning the Gerson program, I became what looked like a
bag of bones,” describes Sandra. “My weight loss was excessive, falling from
120 to 92 pounds. With a height of five feet, six-and-a-half inches, I looked
really skinny. 1 was weak to the point of collapse, and I did remain bedridden
for four months. Only the love and devotion of my care giving parents pulled
me through that worst period of my life.

“But first spending ten days at La Gloria Hospital to learn the Gerson
Therapy, and then returning to my parents’ home to be nursed by them, saved
me. I had rented my Nashville house to fellow church members. Then bringing
my son, I moved in with my mother and dad,” explains Sandra. “At the Gerson
hospital, I immediately underwent detoxification reactions—many of them—
including emotional depression, many tears, constant nausea, vomiting,
headaches, burning sensations from taking castor oil both orally and rectally,
loss of appetite, sleeplessness, whole body pain in the joints, muscles, and
bones. And 1 smelled like permanent- waving solution. It was my habit to
periodically take hair permanents, perhaps five times a year, and that
poisonous liquid had permeated my body organs to poison them. The Gerson
Therapy pulled out those accumulated toxins, and I gave off the stinky odor of
permanent-waving solution. 1 reeked of perm”

A lesson learned from Sandra Whitwell is that a person becomes what he or
she puts into and onto the body. That is, eat garbage-like foods and you become
garbage. Consume carcinogens and you turn into a walking cancer factory.
Bathe a body part in poison as Sandra did to her head, and you make the entire
body a receptacle for cancer. To stay healthy, you must expose yourself only to
good stuff.

“Out of ignorance, I harmed myself with convenience or so-called ‘beauty’
items. In college, I had my room and the halls of that dormitory smelling really
bad from the permanent-waving liquid. Just think of all the contaminated air I
inhaled. Also, before I knew better, it had been my habit to drink up to three
full, six-cup pots of coffee a day,” admits Sandra. “But instruction in the Gerson
Therapy taught me how to live correctly. At my parents’ home back then, body
weight began to come back from my dad and mom making juices for me to
Success Stories By Patients 307

drink. They used only fresh, organic vegetables and fruits, which are more
expensive than the supermarket variety. Originally, my mother was afraid for
my life; she truly thought I was gone, but then she saw that slowly I was
improving.

“It took nearly two years of detoxifying and nourishing my body before the
immune system kicked in and took over against ovarian cancer. I observed it
do this when one day my temperature rose to 104°F during a healing reaction.
After that point, I just got better and better/’ Sandra says. “I took no other
medication or nutritional supplementation other than what the Gerson diet
prescribes—the niacin, coenzymeQio, thyroid, potassium, acidol/pepsin,
pancreatin, and liver. These simple supplements, the diet itself, the juices, and
the detox worked for me. I am alive and thriving today, fourteen years after
being diagnosed with the cancer, because of my faithfully following the Gerson
Therapy [see the photograph below showing how Sandra Whitwell appears
today].

“The detoxification is difficult to take and people should be aware of what to
expect. I kept a diary so that I know what I went through and how to cope with
the flareups. Perhaps you would want some of my suggestions for achieving a
successful Gerson Therapy,” wonders Sandra Whitwell. “Would you?”
308 THE GERSON THERAPY

Sandra Whitwell
Sandra’s Suggestions for a Successful

Gerson Therapy

Having faithfully pursued the Gerson Therapy full-time for two years, and
still making it her total lifestyle, Sandra Whitwell affirms that this procedure
has saved her life and restored her health. During that time almost fifteen years
ago Sandra accepted the Gerson program as her anti- ovarian-cancer treatment,
and nothing else. She still eats, juices, and cleanses according to the Gerson
therapy’s regulations and occasionally returns to the nearest Gerson facility for
further program updates. She looked the picture of robust health when we
visited with her at the Gerson hospital for one full week in November 1999.

“Two years is not so long to ensure that you will live, and during the
process you are renewing every cell in your liver—the main portion of one’s
immune system,” says Sandra. “The Gerson method is not for wimps; however,
it takes fighters! This natural and nontoxic treatment is difficult, because you're
not just popping a pill or having some health professional do something to you
or for you. Instead, you must help yourself and call for personal assistance from
family or friends when needed, at least in the beginning. Most of us are too
accustomed to eating fast foods, looking for fast fixes for what ails us, and
Success Stories By Patients 309

taking the easy way out. Not so with the Gerson Therapy; it’s a life-changing
treatment!

‘From my experience, I put together some suggestions for achieving success
with conquering cancer and other chronic illnesses by use of the Gerson
Therapy. In no particular order of importance, my suggestions follow:

¢ Keep a diary to record your emotional swings, healing reactions, de-
viations from the Gerson program, responses of outsiders to how you are
eating or what you're doing. You'll discover what you've done to bring
on a flare-up. And from their comments, you'll learn who are your real
friends.

* Try to prepare foods and procedures in advance of the next day after
drinking your last daily juice. Not enough time is left to spare during
each day for making coffee, taking ‘coffee breaks,’ engaging in castor oil
enema days, fixing the medications, taking in organically grown produce
shipments, cleaning the veggies, studying recipes, and planning meals.
Being organized is a plus for your self-treatment.

¢ Watch the Gerson videos, read the Gerson books, listen to the

Gerson audiotapes. After almost fifteen years of participating in the Gerson

Therapy, I still do this and learn new information every time.

* On castor oil days, start early with drinking the terrible stuff. Use the little
medicine cups as dosage forms. (Use of castor oil is not for anyone who has
been pretreated with chemotherapy.) I always put one tablespoonful of
cranberry juice or apple juice in my cup first and then add the required two
tablespoonfuls of castor oil. The mixture goes down more readily with juice
added. Then, after swallowing the mixture, I taste the juice rather than the
oil. Always drink one cup of hot coffee directly after swallowing the castor
oil mixture to speed up the process of the oil going through your gas-
trointestinal tract.

¢ Next after drinking the castor oil, eat a piece of fruit and take your first
coffee enema. Undoubtedly this will be a ‘yucky-feeling’ day, but tomorrow
you will definitely feel much better! In my opinion, drinking the castor oil is
easier on the body than taking a castor oil enema.

¢ To prepare the castor oil enema, my suggestion is slightly different from the
Gerson regulation. Put warm distilled water in the bucket and run that
water through the tube into the tub or shower. Then shut off the tube
leaving the warm water in it. Pour out the excess water that remains in the
bucket. Put castor oil and ox bile mix (no soap) in the bucket. Now open the
tube and allow water to flow out into the tub or shower (or toilet); as the
water flows out it pulls the oil mixture into the tube. The tube should hold
the full amount of mixture needed. Shut off the tube! Now fill the bucket
310

THE GERSON THERAPY

with the coffee mixture, and you are ready for your castor oil coffee
cleansing. This enema is usually hard to hold— don’t worry! Hold as long as
possible and still benefit from taking a castor oil cleanse. As it happens, this
method which had been recommended previously is now discontinued by
the Gerson hospital, but I find it still works well for me.

Chamomile tea enemas are always welcome to take when you have released
toxins causing you to feel unable to hold the coffee during a cleansing.
Chamomile taken rectally is soothing, and on castor oil days especially, may
be easier to hold.

Never become upset when you can’t hold the coffee enema. Sometimes you
just need to try again or maybe wait until your next cof- fee-cleansing time.
Just keep trying until you become practiced at
THE GERSON THERAPY

doing the enema and look forward to the good feeling with which it leaves
you.
A trick I use for those rare times when I’m having a hard time holding the
coffee enema is to slow down the flow. I feel fewer spasms if it takes about
five minutes to flow in. Slow the flow by lowering your bucket or closing the
valve on the tube and opening periodically.
If you have tried slowing the enema flow but still feel spasms, put a
teaspoonful of potassium into the four cups of coffee solution. At the
beginning of using the Gerson approach, your body may well be potassium-
depleted which manifests itself by abdominal spasms.
To reduce or eliminate niacin flush, take this vitamin B, only on a full
stomach. Alternatively, let the niacin tablet melt in your mouth or under the
tongue. That's what I do.
If you hire help for daily assistance, employ two or three people so that if
someone doesn’t show for the work shift, you'll have a backup person to do
a double shift. If the absent person is sick, you won't want him or her
around anyway since you're fighting enough against illness.
Don’t play the mind games thrown at you by your subconscious or by other
people. Think positively, play good music, count your blessings, think of the
troubles others are experiencing, and realize that yours are surmountable.
Self-pity will get you nowhere. As I’ve suggested, your diary is the place to
write down your thoughts to get rid of them from your head. Then you can
dwell on better things. Tomorrow, when you reread your diary, you will
wonder why you were in such a bad state of mind.
Each phase in this step-by-step process —juices, food, medications, coffee —is
important. Work hard! Stay with a stick-to-it attitude! Be disciplined!
Succeed!
Finally, remember that God never gives you more than you can handle.
There is a reason for going through this tribulation. After coming out from
under your trouble, you may be the one to save someone else’s life beside
your own!”

—Sandra Whitwell, Stuart, Virginia
Success Stories By Patients 315

PANCREATIC CANCER REMAINS GONE FOR ALMOST FIFTEEN

YEARS

In September 1985, pneumonia developed for forty-six-year-old Mrs. Ronald
(Patricia) Ainey of Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada. Despite her being a
cigarette smoker and alcoholic beverage drinker, she had sustained good
general health throughout her life until that 1985 date. Then, in January 1986,
internist Bennett A. Horner, M.D., F.R.C.P(C), also of Nanaimo, using C AT scan
guidance, had a biopsy performed (tissue drawn out with a fine needle) froma
tumor site on Pat Ainey’s pancreas. The object of this scan and biopsy was to
differentiate pancreatic cancer from several other conditions: benign
pancreatitis, pseudocyst, islet cell carcinoma, or lymphoma. Dr. Horner
confirmed the woman's diagnosis by letter to her family physician in the same
town, A. C. Baird, M.B., CHB, C.C.F.P Dr. Horner's letter stated: “Mrs. Pat
Ainey returned to see me today, January 28, 1986. I informed her that she does
have adenocarcinoma of the pancreas; there is no specific treatment indicated
presently... if she has a lot of pain or discomfort, we'd be glad to help her any
way we
can.

Dr. Horner gave the patient and her husband Ron, who were one month
away from celebrating their thirtieth wedding anniversary, more personal
advice too. “The medical specialist told me, ‘Co home, get your life in order, the
cancer is so bad it is inoperable,’ remembers Mrs. Ainey. “I went through all
the anguish, the crying, and I finally resigned myself to my own death.”®

She had learned that the malignancy had metastasized to her gallbladder,
liver, and spleen. In just a few weeks she lost more than forty-five pounds and
regularly vomited blood. She was classified as being in cytology class (stage)
I-IV pancreatic cancer (which has a projected five-year survival of 1 percent
or less). There were no curative therapies and no proven adjuvant treatment;
only palliation could be offered by orthodox oncologists to provide some pain
control or ascites reduction. She did have ascites, jaundice, pleural (chest wall)
effusion, alcoholic hepatitis, and pain. Any chemotherapy probably would kill
Pat Ainey faster than the cancer itself.

“When you're told by the medical profession that your days are done, that’s
who you believe,/’ admits Mrs. Ainey. But then she read in the Nanaimo Times
newspaper about a Victoria, B.C., man who had been cured of pancreatic cancer
by engaging in the Gerson Therapy. “I decided
I wasn’t going to just bugger around crying and dying. I was going to try to live
the last few months as well as I could for myself and for my family.” While
skeptical at first, wondering if the Gerson hospital in Tijuana, Mexico, was a
scam designed to bilk desperate people, “It was the only hope I had. What I
316 THE GERSON THERAPY

needed was a miracle,” the woman says. “And my husband stomped his foot
down and said, ‘Dammit lady, pack your bag, we're catching the eleven o'clock
boat to the mainland and going to Mexico to try this damn Gerson thing.’”

Ron and Pat Ainey spent two weeks at the Gerson hospital in Playas, a
suburb of Tijuana, where they learned to make her organic juices, what kinds of
foods were appropriate, and how to self-administer five coffee enemas a day.
She explains, “It wasn’t any fun, especially those ‘coffee breaks’ as we called
them. But what choice did I have except to try?”

The Aineys had reserved two weeks to engage in the treatment, and in ten
days she began to feel considerably better than she had in months. Knowing
that she would be required to live stringently on the Gerson program for a
minimum of two years, Mrs. Ainey took up the challenge to conduct the
Gerson therapy at home. And it worked well.

“In December 1986 my doctor told me he thought I had the cancer licked.”

A letter Dr. Baird wrote in February 1990 on another health matter states:
“Mrs. Ainey was diagnosed as having a malignancy of her pancreas. She
received treatment of her disease outside of Canada, and I am pleased to say
that as of the present time she has no evidence of recurrence of the disease, and
what evidence of malignancy was present in 1985 has now gone.”

In a follow-up letter he wrote to an insurance company’s law firm on that
other matter, Dr. Baird added: “In conclusion, I would like to comment that
Mrs. Ainey has survived what is generally a fatal illness and now lives life to
the full”

We spoke with Patricia Ainey on November 20, 1999, at which time she
acknowledged, “I feel good, excellent in fact. I’ve had these past fifteen years to
live happily and well, which I was not supposed to have. I’ve watched my
grandchildren grow up and had a lot of good times in those years.” While Mrs.
Ainey has been free of pancreatic cancer for all of this fifteen-year period, she
still drinks lots of fresh, organic vegetable juices and takes a daily coffee enema.
She also has regular blood tests and cancer markers taken, which she sends to
the Gerson hospital for evaluation. Friends and family sometimes ask why she
continues these practices if
she is cured. Says husband Ron Ainey: “Pat had been looking for a lifeline and
once you ve found one it’s very hard to let go.”

A GERSON PATIENT WHO THOUGHT HIMSELF “PERFECT”
(Retitled from the Gerson Healing Newsletter, vol. 14, no. 5, Sep.-Oct., 1999) by
Charlotte Gerson

It has frequently occurred to me that, in order to really be sure Gerson
patients understand and follow the Gerson Therapy exactly, I ought to fol-
Success Stories By Patients 317

low them around their house and kitchen for twenty-four hours. A situation
that arose recently for a particular Gerson patient amply illustrates this
point. Please allow me to tell you of my experience, for it’s my desire to have
you learn from it for doing the Gerson Therapy right. I was surprised and
shocked by certain deviations from the program.

The patient in question (whom I'll call “Phillip”) was not only very much
interested in the Gerson Therapy for his own recovery; he believes so
strongly about spreading the word of healing that he organized a Gerson
Convention Day. Phillip also invited me to stay at his lovely home overnight
so that I could be spoiled with good, organic Gerson food and juices. Truly,
he is a delightful person to be around, and Phillip’s wife is too.

Their house is located in a wooded area, with beautiful huge trees, and
sitting at the edge of a small lake. In other words, the air is clean and fresh
and the atmosphere relaxing—no problem there. This patient's business is
organized and runs quite well with minimal attention, allowing him to get a
lot of rest and live on a fine income. There is help in the household, so no
pressures exist relating to juice and food preparations. Even so, there are at
least four major problems in Phillip’s application of the Gerson Therapy
which I shall describe:

1. The water piped into his home is “hard’; it contains minerals. Like
other people in the area, therefore, the patient's home is equipped with
“water softener” equipment. Phillip’s very warm, concerned and
cooperative wife is doing everything in her power to help her husband
fully recover from melanoma with metastases to the liver; yet, she told
me that she brings in “sacks of salt’ for adding to the water softener! As
part of the process of removing the unwelcome hard water minerals,
such water-softening equipment replaces these with sodium What
happens as a result is that the patient washes and bathes in “softened
water,” loaded with salt.

Salt is very easily absorbed through the skin and should never be used.
by a Gerson patient. The sodium in salt is an enzyme inhibitor and the
Gerson Therapy is designed to remove excess sodium. Salt, in fact, is
needed for fast growth of tumor tissue. It is also the basis for the “tissue
damage syndrome,” when normal cells lose their ability to hold potassium
while sodium penetrates their protoplasm, causing edema and loss of
function. This tissue damage is, according to my father’s findings, the
beginning of all chronic disease. Naturally, for a cancer patient, bathing in
salt water (even in the ocean) must be avoided at all costs.

At Phillip’s home we were served a very delicious and attractive hmch
which included a lovely salad loaded with avocados. I immediately asked
if the patient, too, was eating them He was! This was another serious
318

THE GERSON THERAPY

mistake, since avocados contain a fairly large percentage of fat. The reason
avocados and other fat-containing foods are forbidden is that fats tend to
stimulate new tumor growth! The lady of the house said that she thought
that avocados were served at the Mexican Gerson hospital, but she is
wrong. They are not! The problem here is that the patient or caregiver
should not rely on memory or rumor alone but should refer to the
published information authorized by the Gerson Institute.

All these items are clearly set clown in Dr. Gerson’s A Cancer Therapy

and several other sources; and avocados are the second item on the
“Forbidden Foods’ list.
As part of the lunch, we had a very nice vegetable soup. It contained some
zucchini, peas, celery, onions, and a few other vegetables. The patient
asked me how I enjoyed the “Hippocrates soup.” I had to state that the
soup we were eating was not Hippocrates soup as Dr. Gerson describes it
in his book. The combination of ingredients that are supposed to be in that
soup are clearly described in A Cancer Therapy as well as the Gerson
Therapy Handbook (formerly, the Gerson Therapy Primer), and the ingredi-
ents listed are very specific.

Hippocrates (referred to by the medical profession as “the father of
medicine”) understood that this special combination of ingredients in the
soup has a beneficial, detoxifying effect on the kidneys. For this reason, Dr.
Gerson had made use of them He concluded that the soup ingredients
were so important he wanted patients to eat the “special soup” twice daily
to benefit the kidneys and help them clear toxins from the body.
Occasionally, one can add extra tomatoes to give the soup a different
flavor; or one can cut up and roast some onions on a dry cookie sheet (no
fat, butter, or oil) in the oven. Then these extras can be added to the same
basic soup recipe for a tasty treat. However, the basic recipe should remain
unchanged.

Phillip’s wife also thoughtfully offered me some enema coffee, which I
gladly accepted. When I picked it up for use, however, I seriously
wondered whether it was the proper strength. I have used enemas for
many years and know pretty well what the coffee should look like. The
solution being provided seemed too weak to be considered “concentrate”
for a usual dilution of 4 to 1. The lady “thought” that she used the recipe in
the Handbook and that it was right, but again she was wrong. My
suggestion is that the caregiver must be sure each enema contains the
equivalent of three rounded tablespoons of coffee (see A Cancer Therapy, p.
247). If a concentrate is prepared, each portion must contain the three ta-
blespoonfuls of coffee. The coffee enema, too, is so very important that it is
imperative the mixture or solution be correct. Please check and recheck the
Success Stories By Patients 319

preparation of the coffee concentrate created for internal cleansing.

5. Somewhat less important than the above four points is another one. Phillip
does enjoy eating some bread with his meals—quite acceptable. But it is
also important to understand that the main requirements for nutrition are
the salads, soup, potato, vegetables, and fruit. If all those foods have been
consumed, it is all right for the patient to also have one slice of unsalted
rye bread. Even so, be aware that bread should never be the main part of a
meal.

Lhave discussed Phillip’s type of problem with the most experienced Gerson
Therapy medical doctors whom I know. They affirmed that subtle aspects of
patient noncompliance cause them difficulties. Aside from the above, there are
other problems we have run across. The Gerson doctors as well as myself
(when I talk to patients) meet some serious obstacles to healing. When we ask
various patients about their compliance with the Gerson Therapy directives
(such as the above patient who made serious errors), for instance, they will
assure us that they're doing everything “perfectly.” Such patients don’t seem to
realize what is wrong with their version of the therapy. Phillip, too, thought he
was “perfect.”

When Gerson therapists try to help, heal, and direct patients on the Gerson
Therapy, we are relying on the various tools that we have specially created to
give patients and families every possible help and guidance: the food
preparation videotape (Tape III); the recipes in the Handbook, the other four-
hour, two-part workshop tapes (Tape II) discussing in detail as much of the
treatment as we can; and, most important, Dr. Gerson’s original book. At this
point, I need to stress again that the patient must familiarize himself very
thoroughly with this material and review it over and over again. As Sandra
Whitwell pointed out in her suggestions, you always learn something new
when restudying the Gerson Therapy information.

One problem area that keeps coming up is the food preparation. Just boiling
the vegetables and putting them on a plate is not good enough. The Gerson
Therapy Video: vol. 3; Food Preparation initiates the cook into various ways to
make foods tasty. For example, cooked beets when peeled and sliced can be
reheated a little with some freshly made applesauce and stirred. The vegetable
then resembles Harvard beets. Or the sliced beets can be dressed with onions,
some green pepper strips, and vinegar with flaxseed oil dressing for a beet
salad. During the summer months, these salads (also potato salad, string bean
or butter bean salad, etc.) are very welcome, refreshing, and stimulating to the
appetite.

There are many suggested recipes in the back of the Gerson Therapy Handbook
that have unfortunately been disregarded by some patients. As a result, the
Gerson Institute occasionally receives reports from caregivers that the patients
320 THE GERSON THERAPY

are weak, losing weight, and doing poorly. Almost always, it turns out that
they have “cravings” for pizza, enchiladas, or some other greasy, salty,
forbidden food. They are simply hungry because they are not eating well-
prepared healing and nutritious Gerson meals.

Gerson meals offer a distinct advantage: if the patient (or family member for
that matter) eats fresh, organic food, it is truly satisfying. Frequently we hear
further reports that patients’ companions who participate in the Gerson
program lose their personal cravings for sweets or heavy desserts. But the key
to success is eating tasty food that is prepared with imagination and inspiration
from the recipes provided.

I must remind patients frequently that when they are on a nutritional
therapy such as this one, they are on nothing if they don’t eat! If patients eat
properly, most will gain weight if they are emaciated. Those who are too heavy
will lose weight on the same regimen.

Fruits that are in season in the summer, such as cherries, apricots,
peaches, nectarines, plums, pears, and grapes, are especially valuable— they
are high in the best nutrients: vitamins, potassium, and enzymes. Not far
behind are apples, which are available virtually all year round. Patients
(unless they are diabetic or suffer from candidiasis) should always eat much
fruit at night, first thing in the morning, and anytime between meals.

Yet one summer food presents a problem: corn. It is perfectly fine to eat
fresh corn. The difficulty arising with corn is that nearly everyone loves it
and during the season is likely to eat it to the exclusion of other vegetables.
That is a very bad idea. The vegetables should provide variety and a large
selection of special healing plant chemicals (phytochemicals) and trace
minerals. Eating mostly one vegetable is not acceptable and does not fulfill
the purpose. Let the guiding spirit of the patient be: ill do the best possible
to help my sick body heal’ rather than “Tl see how little I can do and still
get away with it”

References for Chapter Twenty-One

1. Batchelder, T. “Qualitative research on patient experiences and implica-
tions for long-term care facilities.” Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients 196:56-
61, November 1999.

2. Diamond, WJ.; Cowden, WL.; Goldberg, B. An Alternative Medicine
Defimtive Guide to Cancer. Tiburon, Calif: Future Medicine Publishing, 1997, p.
212.

3. Kleinman, A.; Eisenberg, L.; Good, B. “Culture, illness and care: clinical
lessons from anthropologic and cross-cultural research.” Annals of Internal
Medicine 88:251-258, 1978.
Chapter Twenty-Two

RECIPES

his final chapter contains recipes for dishes prepared only with certified
organically grown fresh fruits, dried fruits, vegetables, grains, and
sweeteners. Especially important here are the following items:

¢ Hippocrates soup, recommended by Dr. Max Gerson in the first edition of
his book

¢ Juices as described

* Salads of all types

¢ Many kinds of salad dressing

* Cooked vegetable dishes of all types

* Potatoes baked or prepared in different ways

¢ Vegetarian loaves

* Soups based on the Hippocrates soup

* Many kinds of fruit dishes

* Dairy dishes of several types (when allowed)

¢ Breads of organic rye with little whole wheat, unsalted

* Desserts of many types of fruit, raw or stewed.

NOTE 1: The recipes that follow were compiled and edited with the co-
operation of Christeene Lindsay-Hildenbrand to be used in conjunction with the
Gerson Therapy videotape “Charlotte Gerson Demonstrates Basic Gerson Food
Preparation.”

Nore 2: Recipes marked with a YN were contributed by Yvonne
Nienstadt, director of health services at Cal-a-Vie, Vista, California. Recipes
marked with a S> sign were contributed by Susan DeSimone of the Gerson
Institute. Recipes marked with an were contributed by Marisol Zuniga of the
Hospital Meridien in Tijuana, Mexico. Recipes marked with a S°¢ were
contributed by the Gerson Support Group in England. The recipes marked with
RC were contributed by Richard Crowell. Recipes marked DAIRY contain restricted
dairy ingredients; instructions for their preparation should be followed carefully.
The recipes with an asterick (") can be found in the Dairy section of the Gerson
Recipes 323

Therapy Handbook.

GERSON THERAPY RECIPES

The Gerson Therapy offers a diet containing a large variety of vegetarian foods
ingested in huge quantities. Eating them in the recommended amounts will
enable a consumer to reach an ideal weight level and remain there. And one’s
metabolism will achieve only homeostasis as well But these two healthy
situations are attained only when ingestion is done under certain conditions.

First, use only certified organically grown fresh fruits, dried fruits, vegetables,
grains, and sweeteners. We repeat: Use strictly fresh fruits and vegetables and
absolutely no canned fruits or vegetables.

Second, the produce should not be peeled or scraped unless indicated. To
clean the foods, use only lukewarm water and a brush.

Third, sweeten only with Gerson-approved light honey, maple syrup, or sugar.
Dried organic cane sugar (Sucanat®), which has a molasses flavor, may be added
in recipes calling for brown sugar. Some cooks may prefer other sweetening
options.

Special Soup (Hippocrates Soup)

For one person use a 4-quart pot, assemble the following vegetables, then
cover with distilled water:

1 medium celery knob (or 3 to 4 stalks of celery), 1 medium parsley root (if
available), garlic as desired, 2 small leeks (if not available, replace with 2 medium
onions), 1/4 Ibs tomatoes or more, 2 medium onions, 1 lb potatoes, and a little
parsley.

Do not peel any of these special soup vegetables; just wash and scrub them
well and cut them coarsely; simmer them slowly for 2 hours, then put them
through a food mill in small portions; only fibers should be left.

Vary the amount of water used for cooking according to taste and desired
consistency. Keep well covered in refrigerator no longer than 2 days. Warm up as
much as needed each time. Note: For recipes that call for soup stock, use the
liquid from this special soup.

PREPARATION OF JUICES
Juices are always freshly prepared. (As a reference, see the classic book A Cancer
Therapy, p. 240.) Please be aware that it's not acceptable to prepare the full day's
juices in the morning.
Carrot-Apple (8 0z juice)
3 carrots (6 oz) and 1 large green apple (6 02).

Green Juice

Obtain as many as possible of the following kinds of leaves (no others): romaine
lettuce, Swiss chard, beet tops (young inner leaves), watercress, some red
cabbage, green pepper ("A of small one), endive, and escarole. Add 1 medium
324 THE GERSON THERAPY

apple for each glass when grinding.

Orange Juice

Squeeze only with a reamer-type juicer made of glass, plastic, or porcelain. Do
not use any juice press into which the orange is inserted with the skin (if the skin
is also pressed out, it will emit harmful fatty acids and aromatic substances
contained in its surface). Do not use an aluminum juicer.

JUICERS

Use a separate grinder and a separate press for juicing or a juicer that
incorporates both. Do not use liquefiers, centrifuges, juice mixers or masters, and

so on.

Pressing Process

Take 1 or 2 coarsely woven nylon cloths, 12" square, and place a cupful of pulp
into center of moistened cloth, fold in thirds in both directions, and press.

Rinse cloths in cool water after each juice preparation.

Do not allow juice to dry on the cloths.

Wash thoroughly each night in warm or hot water; rinse thoroughly.

Keep the pressing cloths overnight in a freezer.

Itis essential to clean the machine and cloths very well.

Ifjuice retains the taste of cloth, use a new cloth.

Allow 2 cloths per juicing.

Have 1 set of cloths for each type of juice.

Leftovers of all pressings can be used only for compost or as animal food.

If the patient goes to work again after healing, apple and carrot juice only may

be taken and kept in a thermos for no longer than 4 hours to drink on the job.

SALADS AND DRESSINGS

Raw fruit or raw vegetables, when finely grated or shredded, must be used
fresh, as quickly as possible.

Raw living tissues may not be stored after any kind of preparation (please see A
Cancer Therapy, p. 189).

The following vegetables are very important to consume (finely grated if
necessary, or chopped; mixed or separate): knob celery, tomatoes, escarole,
cauliflower, romaine, chives, green peppers, apples, carrots, lettuce (all types),
chicory, watercress, radishes, scallions, and endives.

Buttermilk Dressing™ *

1 cup churned buttermilk (not cultured), 1/3 cup nonfat yogurt cheese
(Quark), 14 tsp horseradish powder, 2 tsp honey, 1 tsp cider or wine vinegar,
Recipes 325

pinch of dill, and tarragon or savory.
Hand beat or buzz in blender until smooth. Leftover dressing may be kept in a
tightly covered jar in the refrigerator for 48 hours.

Garlic and Onion Dressing

44 tsp lemon juice or wine vinegar, 2 tsp water, 1 tsp brown sugar, a little diced
onion, 1 clove garlic, and a small amount of permitted herbs.
Mix ingredients together, allow time for flavors to mingle, and serve on salad.

Herb Dressing

2 14 cup apple cider vinegar, 1 tsp brown sugar, 2/3 cup water.

Mix these three basic ingredients together and add some or all of the following
herbs (optional) and leave them to infuse: tarragon (pushed in stalk first),
shallots or spring onions chopped finely, 2 cloves garlic peeled and crushed with
the back of a knife, and 1 fresh bay leaf.

Orange Dill Vinaigrette®©

44 cup vinegar, 3 cloves peeled garlic, 1 cup orange juice, 12 cup water, 1 green
onion, 2 tbsp honey, ¥ tsp dried dill, and 4 red bell pepper.

Blend all ingredients in Osterizer. Makes 1 pint of zesty and sweet dressing.
Variation: Substitute juice of 1 lime or lemon for orange juice; increase water.
Substitute sage or thyme for dill.

Spinach Dressing™ *

1 cup nonfat yogurt, 2 cups spinach chopped raw or 1 cup spinach cooked, 3
green onions chopped, 1-2 tsp vinegar, 1 tsp dill weed, a pinch of mace.
Place in a blender and spin until smooth.

Yoguefort Dressing*

‘h cup dry, fat-free and unsalted cottage cheese, 1 cup yogurt (or churned
buttermilk), ‘4 cup vinegar or lemon juice, 2 tsp honey, 1 clove garlic crushed,
tsp tarragon, marjoram, or dill, ‘cup chives or green onions chopped, and 2
tbsp linseed oil (optional).

Blend the first 5 ingredients in blender until smooth.

Add herbs and chives.

To thin mixture, add more yogurt.

Chill before serving.

Summer Cole Slaw*

1 stalk celery finely chopped, ‘cup minced red onion, 1 42 cups shredded
cabbage, ‘cup shredded carrot, pinch of fresh dill, and 2 cups nonfat yogurt.
Combine all ingredients in bow] and toss well.

Serve chilled.

Artichoke Salad

1 purple onion, 1 tomato, 2 tbsp apple cider vinegar, 1 artichoke, 1 green bell
pepper, 2 carrots, and 3 tbsp flaxseed oil.
326 THE GERSON THERAPY

Wash the artichokes well and boil in covered pot for 45 minutes to 1 hour.
When ready, peel them until you can see the center.

Remove the “chokes” with a spoon and discard.

Cut the artichoke heart and other vegetables into bite-sized pieces. Combine
and toss with vinegar and oil.

Bessarabian Nightmares?

2 tomatoes sliced, 1 small onion sliced, 1 red or green pepper (or both) sliced,
2-3 cloves of garlic crushed, and permitted herbs to taste.

Layer each ingredient in a glass Pyrex® baking dish.

Bake at 350° until tender.

Cool and add flaxseed oil to taste when cool enough.

Celery Root (Knob) Salad

Remove loose roots from 2 celery knobs and scrub clean.
Boil knobs in jacket about 1 hour; peel and slice.

Add: 1 medium chopped raw onion, scallions (green onion).
Toss with Herb or Garlic and Onion Dressing.

Cold Broccoli Salad¥N *

1 lbs broccoli cut into bite-sized pieces.

Stew over a low flame in a heavy pan with a tight-fitting cover until barely
tender, about 25-30 minutes. Chill.

Add: 1 cup cherry tomatoes, 44 cup shallots or green onions, 1 cup buttermilk
dressing, 2-3 tsp chives, and 2-3 tsp parsley.

Combine broccoli, tomatoes, and shallots in bowl

Mix in dressing.

Serve on bed of endive and garnish with chives and parsley.

Eggplant SaladS>
1 eggplant baked for one hour at 350° F (180°C elsius).
Let eggplant cool, then chop into bite-sized pieces.
Combine with: 1 small onion chopped, 1 tbsp cider vinegar, chopped parsley, 2
sliced tomatoes, and flax oil.

Fruity Winter Salad 6S¢ IMIRY

42 white cabbage, 2 medium carrots, 2 red apples, 1 oz raisins, 1 oz dried figs, 1
oz dried apricots, 10 tbsp nonfat yogurt, 144 lemon, and chopped parsley.

Soak dried figs and apricots in bowl of water overnight.

The next day, empty water and add finely shredded cabbage, coarsely grated
carrots and apples, and raisins.

Ina separate bowl, combine yogurt, lemon juice, and parsley.

Combine contents of each bow] and toss together until well mixed. Serve chilled.
Recipes 327

Italian Salad

Cauliflower, broccoli, celery, tomatoes.
Wash and cut up all vegetables, then toss with Herb or Garlic and Onion
Dressing.

Peach Salad™

Mix together the following: 1 tomato chopped, 1 red pepper chopped, 1 green
pepper chopped, 1 peach chopped, 14 cup green and red seedless grapes, and a
few mint leaves.

Dress with lemon and garlic dressing: equal parts lemon juice and water.

Add a little brown sugar (Sucanat) and crushed garlic.

Potato Salad, Basic (#1)

Boil potatoes in jackets until soft (1 hour); peel and slice.
Add: onions, scallions, celery, green peppers, Herb or Garlic and Onion
Dressing.

Potato Salad, Fancy (#2)

1 potatoes, 1 white onion, 12 cup celery, 3 grated carrots, flaxseed oil, 2 bay
leaves, 1 purple onion, parsley, 3 tbsp apple cider vinegar, and 1 green bell
pepper.
Boil the potatoes, in their jackets, with the bay leaves on slow heat. Cut the
vegetables and sauté with the apple cider vinegar (can use wok). Use no oil!
Once the potatoes are cooked, peel and cut them into small cubes and add the
cooked vegetables.
Add the flaxseed oil after the mixture is cooled.

Rice Salad5>

Mix cooked, organic, brown rice (with bay leaf and a little rosemary) with
plenty of chopped vegetables including tomatoes, celery, zucchini, radishes,
fresh garden herbs, and lemon and garlic dressing (see under Peach Salad).
Rose, borage, or marigold petals look beautiful sprinkled over the salad. Add
apricots that have been soaked in water and chopped (if desired).

Raw Grated Carrots and Apples

Grate by putting through food grinder or Norwalk juicer: 2 or 3 carrots, apple
peeled.
Add ‘Acup raisins, juice of 4 orange or lemon.

Red and Green Salad™

Combine the following ingredients and serve with spinach dressing: 1 head
romaine lettuce, 2 cups shredded savoy or green cabbage, 3 green onions, 1 cup
sunflower greens, 2 kohlrabi cut in shoestring strips or peeled broccoli stems, 1
thinly sliced yellow crookneck squash, and 1 pint cherry tomatoes or 1 large
sweet red pepper cut in strips.

Sunchoke (Jerusalem Artichoke) Salad
Combine: 2 cups sunchokes (cooked or raw), ‘cup celery sliced diagonally, ‘a
328 THE GERSON THERAPY

cup green peppers, and ‘4cup salad dressing.

Tomato and Pepper Salad"

1 green pepper cut into thin rings, 2 tomatoes firm but ripe and sliced or chopped.
Dress with lemon juice and crushed garlic, fresh herbs, and chopped celery leaves.
Add flax oil to taste.

Beet Salad

Boil beets in water for 1 hour.
Peel and cut tips off; slice thin.
Add chopped onions and either Herb or Garlic and Onion Dressing.

COOKED VEGETABLE DISHES

Preparation of Vegetables

All vegetables must be cooked slowly, over low flame, with little or no added
water. In order to preserve the natural flavor of the vegetables and keep them
easily digestible, the slow cooking process is very important. All vegetables
should be “done” or tender. Valuable components are lost in fast cooking by
excessive heat. Because the components’ cells burst, the minerals go out of their
colloidal composition and become more difficult to be absorbed. A stainless steel
“flame tamer’ may be used to prevent burning. And a little of the Special Soup
(see above) may also be used, or tomatoes, apple slices, or chopped onion may be
placed at the bottom of the pan to produce more fluid. In some cases this addition
also improves the flavor. Only spinach water is too bitter, contains too much
oxalic acid, and must be discarded.

Tomatoes, leeks, zucchini, and onions should be stewed in their own juices, as
they contain an abundance of fluid by themselves. Red beets should be cooked
like potatoes, in their peel, in water. All vegetables must be carefully washed and
cleaned. Peeling or scraping is forbidden, because important mineral salts and
vitamins are deposited directly under the skin.

The pot (not aluminum) must close tightly, to prevent escape of steam Don't
use a pressure cooker. Lids must be heavy and fit well into the pots. Cooked
foods (soup and fruit) may be kept in the refrigerator for 48 hours. Baked
vegetables should be slow cooked in a “low” oven (180— 190° F; use oven
thermometer) for 2 to 2 hours, in a covered casserole with a tightly fitting lid.
This method of baking is virtually waterless. Use onions or tomatoes, or sprinkle
vegetables with lemon to add moisture when necessary.

Stewed vegetables are cooked in a heavy pot with a tightly fitting lid on top of
Recipes 329

the stove over a low flame, slowly with little or no added liquid.

Simmered vegetables are cooked on the top of the stove over a low
flame in a tightly covered pan with a small amount of liquid. The temperature is
kept just at the boiling point.

Boiled vegetables (like corn and artichokes) are cooked on the top of the stove
in a heavy pot with a tightly fitting lid. Place 1" of cold water in the bottom of
the pot, add the washed vegetables (do not peel or scrape), and cover. Cook
over medium heat, slowly bringing the liquid to a boil (bubbles breaking on the
surface and steam given off). Lower the flame as much as possible, keeping the
liquid boiling.

Note: Bring liquids to a boil only if the recipe specifically calls for it.

Tightly Fitting Lids
Saucepans must be tightly covered to prevent steam from escaping. Covers

must be heavy and close-fitting.
You may have to place wax paper under the lid to aid the seal.

Artichokes

Cut artichoke ends and rinse in the center.

Bring 2 inches of water to a boil.

Add artichokes.

Lower temperature, cover, and simmer for approximately 1 hour.
Serve with salad dressing on the side as a dip.

Asparagus

Bake in covered casserole with a small amount of soup stock or lemon juice in
low oven 1 hour, or simmer with 14 soup stock for 30 minutes or until tender.

Beautiful BorschtS>

1 onion, 3 garlic cloves, 1 cup Special Soup, 6 small beets with tops, 1 large
potato, 1 carrot, 4 red cabbage leaves, 2 bay leaves, 3 cups water, and

1 tomatoes.

Run all the vegetables through your grinder and add the water and bay leaves.
Cook for 30 minutes on low heat.

Serve with a dab of nonfat yogurt.

Beets
Bake or boil beets in their jackets.

Glazed Beets*N (serves 6-8)

Scrub 9 large beets and boil in 1" water until tender, approx. 1 to 12hours.

Peel in cold water.

Slice or cut into bite-sized pieces.

Glaze for Beets:

Combine: 2/3 cup fresh orange juice, 1 tsp cornstarch, 4 tsp cider vinegar, and 1
tsp honey or crude brown sugar.

Cook over low flame until thick.
330 THE GERSON THERAPY

Add beets and mix well.
Variation: Use 44 cup apple juice and 3 tsp lemon juice in place of orange juice.

Beets, Cooked and Creamed!MIRY

2 cooked beets, 6 tbsp nonfat yogurt, 1 tbsp fresh snipped chives, 2 tbsp

finely chopped onion, finely chopped parsley.

Put cooked, chopped beets into a saucepan with the yogurt, chives, and onion
and heat gently.

Put into serving dish and sprinkle with chopped parsley.

Broccoli

Bake in a covered casserole in low oven with onions or a small amount of soup
stock for 1-2 hours.
Serve with tomato sauce.

Broccoli and HerbsM2

2 bunches of broccoli, 4-6 cloves of garlic, 42 onion sliced, 1% tsp dill, and 44 cup
Special Soup broth.

Wash broccoli and peel stems.

Put garlic and onion in one pot and cook until onion becomes translucent.

Add cut broccoli crowns and stems, dill, and broth.

Cook on low heat until broccoli is tender.

Festive Broccoli™ (or Festive Green Beans)

1 large bunch broccoli (or 342 cups sliced green beans), 1 clove garlic minced, 1
small onion diced, 1 medium sweet red or yellow bell pepper cut in strips, 2 tsp
lemon juice (optional), and tsp dried or 1 tsp fresh dill weed.

Select dark green bunch of broccoli with no yellowing.

Wash well and cut into spears, peeling tougher stalks at base.

Place onion and garlic in pot.

Cover and stew on low flame for 45 minutes or until tender.

Add pepper strips for last 20-25 minutes of cooking.

Add lemon just before serving (lemon will discolor broccoli if added during
cooking).

Sprinkle vegetables with dill and serve.

Cauliflower

Wash cauliflower and break into sections.
Add 2-3 tomatoes, sliced and cut into chunks.
Stew together for approximately 45 minutes (or until tender) on low heat.

Cauliflower and Carrot Sauce

1 small cauliflower, 3 carrots, and flaxseed oil.
Recipes 331

Separate the cauliflowerets and place in a baking dish with a little water and
cook until soft at 250° F When ready, drain off the water.

At the same time, simmer the carrots on low heat with enough water until they
are soft.

Blend carrots in blender with the oil.

Pour sauce over the cooked cauliflower, and place in warm oven (turned off)
for 5-10 minutes, before serving.

Carrots and Honey

Wash carrots, cut off ends, and slice.

Do not peel or scrape.

Stew in a small amount of soup stock for 45 minutes or until tender. Last 5-10
minutes of stewing add: 14 tsp honey for slight flavoring.
Recipes 332

Chard Rolls, StuffedMZ

1 bunch of chard, 6 medium potatoes, 4 carrots, 42 onion sliced, and 3 large
cloves of garlic minced.

Cook onions and potatoes separately.

In another pot, cook carrots and garlic.

When done, puree each potful separately, then mix together.

Put chard leaves in very hot water, being sure not to overcook.

Spread each leaf and remove tough center stem.

Then place puree in center of leaf and roll tightly.

Display on tray and serve with ketchup (see recipe, p. 85 of the Gerson
Therapy Handbook).

Corn

Corn may be baked in the husk wrapped in foil.
Bake in low oven for 1 hour or place in boiling water for approximately 7

minutes.

Corn with Mixed Vegetables

1 stalks of celery, 2 carrots, 2 ears of corn, and 2 zucchini squash.
Wash the corn well and husk it.

Cut the kernels off.

Slice the other vegetables into smaller pieces.

Put the corn in a baking dish and add the vegetables.

Bake in the oven at 200° F for 1 hour.

Creamed Corn

1 ears of corn and 1 green bell pepper.
Husk corn and cut off the kernels.
Put kernels from 2 ears in a blender and blend.
Add the kernels from the third ear to the blended corn.
Place in a baking dish and on the top place sliced green pepper.
Bake in the oven 1 42 hours at 200-250? F.

Corn with Orange Juice

1 ears of corn and 1 glass of orange juice.

Wash the corn well, husk, and cut off the kernels.
Put this in a baking dish with a lid and bake in the oven at 250° F until done.
Pour the corn juice off, and add the orange juice.
Let set 5-10 minutes before serving.

Dilly Beans™

2 cups green beans, 1/3 cup onion sliced in half rings, 1% tsp dill weed, 2 tsp
lemon juice, and green or white cabbage.

Combine in pan: 44 cabbage, shredded thinly, pinch maxjoram, 3-4 tsp apple
cider vinegar, 1 large tomato, chopped sage, and 1 onion diced. Combine and
bake in low oven in a covered casserole until tender. Stew approximately 1

hour, until tender.
Recipes 333
Do not add water.

Eggplant, Baked

Put some soup stock in bottom of large covered baking dish.

Add in layers: 1 chopped onion, 1 eggplant sliced, plus 2 tomatoes sliced and
skinned.

Cover and bake in low oven for 2 hours.

Eggplant, Stewed

Combine in a stew pot: 1 eggplant cut into cubes, 2 onions chopped, and 3
tomatoes (peeled and chopped).

Stew approximately 30 minutes (until tender).

Do not add water.

Eggplant Roulades*?4!®Y with Red Pepper Sauce

The Sauce:
1 red pepper quartered and deseeded, 1 onion finely chopped, 2 tomatoes
chopped, 1 clove garlic crushed, and 6 tbsp water.
To make the sauce, cook the pepper, onion, tomatoes and garlic in the water,
and simmer for 20 minutes.
Put through the food processor or blender.
The Roulade:
1 eggplants, 16 oz of cottage cheese (unsalted, nonfat), 2 tomatoes skinned and
chopped, plus herbs (such as parsley or coriander).
For the roulade, cut the eggplants lengthwise into 1/4 inch slices.
Put in an oven-proof dish and cook a little in the oven to soften them
In the meantime, mix together the cottage cheese and herbs and prepare the
tomatoes.
Then spread a little cottage cheese over each partially cooked piece of eggplant,
scatter with tomatoes and roll up.
Place back into the oven-proof dish and cook for 15-20 minutes.
Serve hot, garnished with the pepper sauce.

Fennel TreatS>

1 bulb of fennel, 1 large tomato cut into 4" slices, and 2-3 cloves garlic peeled
and sliced thin.

Cut off stalks and leaves from fennel.

Slice bulb in half lengthwise so you have two flat halves.

Rinse halves under running water to remove sand and put them in a baking
dish with cut side up.

Cover halves with tomato slices and place garlic slices on top of tomatoes.

Cover dish and bake at 250° for 1-2 hours.

Serve with a baked potato and a salad of grated carrots on a bed of pretty

greens.
334 THE GERSON THERAPY

Green Chard Rolls

4 leaves of green chard, 2 carrots, 4 head broccoli, 2 cloves garlic, 4 cup rice
uncooked, %4 head cauliflower, 2 small zucchini squash, 1 ear of corn (cut
kernels off), and 12 tomatoes.

Wash the vegetables well.

Put the chard leaves in hot water long enough to wilt them so they will bend.
Cut the other vegetables into small pieces, and put them in a pan with a little bit
of water to boil on low heat.

When cooked, drain the water off.

Make a sauce in the blender with the tomatoes and garlic, and pour this sauce
on top of the vegetables and raw rice.

Place some of the vegetables-rice mixture in the center of each leaf and roll them
up.

Put these in a baking dish with a lid and bake in the oven for 1 to 142 hours at
250°F.
335 THE GERSON THERAPY
Green Peppers

2-4 sliced green peppers and 2-4 sliced onions.
Stew in tightly covered pot approximately 30 minutes (add no water).

Lima Beans and Zucchini

1 large onion, 1 clove garlic, 4 cup soup stock, 1 cup fresh lima beans,
1 cups zucchini, 4 med. tomatoes, 4 tsp cornstarch, 4 sprigs fresh parsley, a
dash of thyme and sage or a pinch of dried parsley.

Mix all ingredients except herbs.

Simmer about 15 minutes (until tender).

Thicken with cornstarch mixed with a little water.

Just before serving add herbs.

Onions and Raisins

1 onion peeled and chopped plus 4 cup raisins.
Stew in tightly covered pot approximately 30 minutes.

Onions, Cheese Marinated*

2 tbsp lemon juice, 3 oz pot cheese (unsalted, nonfat), 42 tsp brown sugar, and
2 cups onions sliced thick.

Stuffed Peppers? *

1 large green or red pepper, 4 oz pot cheese, 44 onion, 1 zucchini, 1 small
carrot, 3 tomatoes, 1 small turnip, 1 clove garlic, 1 tbsp fresh mixed herbs, and 4
oz Special Soup.

Put the pepper in a saucepan with a little water and cook over low heat
(covered) until tender.

Remove from the pan and leave the pepper upside down to drain and cool.

Finely chop the onion, zucchini, carrot, herbs, tomatoes, turnip, and garlic.

Place in a small saucepan with the soup and simmer over low heat for 45
minutes to an hour.

Core the pepper with a sharp knife, removing all seeds.

Mix the pot cheese with the cooked vegetables and fill the pepper using a small
spoon.

Stand the pepper in a suitable baking dish and bake for 40 minutes at

Serve with French Tomato Sauce, baked potato, and a green vegetable.
Potatoes

Potatoes are most often boiled slowly in a covered pot over medium- low heat
approximately 1 hour until tender.

Baked Potatoes

Baked potatoes should be thoroughly washed, not scraped or peeled. Bake in a
low-heat oven for 2 or 2 42 hours or, alternatively, bake for 50 minutes to 1 hour
at 350° F.
336 THE GERSON THERAPY
Mashed Potatoes

Peel and cube potatoes.

Place in pan with one small onion and enough water to bring to a boil and
simmer until done.

When done, there should be no water left.

Mash with enough nonfat yogurt to make smooth.

Mashed Potatoes and Chard

Take one bunch of chard, green or red, wash and shred, and put in pan. Add
small amount (4-5 tbsp) of water or soup stock, and start to boil. When boiling,
turn down to simmer.

Meantime, peel 3 large or 4 medium potatoes; cube and place on top of the
chard.

Let simmer until potatoes are soft and done.

Remove water if any remains, and add approximately 6-8 oz of nonfat yogurt.
Mash all together.

Add a little more yogurt if the mixture is too dry.

The same recipe can be used with kale. When using kale, remove central stems
by stripping them before shredding into pan.

Parsley Potatoes

Boil several potatoes in their skins until done.
Remove the peel and roll in some chopped parsley after slightly brushing with
flaxseed oil.

Potato Puffs (Note: this is marginal food; eat rarely)

Take a baking potato and cut it into thin (14") slices.

Place the slices on the oven rack and, without any addition, bake at high heat
(425° F) to puff, turn over, and lower heat to 325° F (with oven door cracked
open).

Bake for another 20 minutes.

The slices puff up and become crisp and tasty, almost like fried potatoes.

Done when shiny brown on both sides.

Scalloped Potatoes

Take a glass baking dish and place one whole chopped onion in bottom. Slice
potatoes and place one layer on top of the onion.
Then place a layer of sliced tomato on top, another layer of sliced or chopped
onion.
Sprinkle with a dash of maxjoram and/or thyme and bake in a low oven
1-2 hours or until done.

Potatoes and Carrots, Westphalian Style
6-8 small carrots sliced or 4-5 large carrots sliced, 3 medium potatoes or 2 large
Recipes 337

potatoes, 1 large onion, and 3-4 tbsp of soup stock.
Wash and slice carrots into pan.
Peel and slice potatoes and chop onion.
Add all together in pan with soup stock.
Let simmer until done, adding a bit more soup stock if necessary. When
done, no water should remain in pan.

Red Cabbage

Combine in pan: 44 cabbage shredded, 3 tsp vinegar, 3 large chopped onions,
2 bay leaves, and a little soup stock.

Stew over low heat approximately 1 hour.

Last half hour add: 3 apples peeled and grated plus 1 tsp raw sugar.

Spinach

After cutting off roots wash 3-4 times.

Put in large, tightly covered pot that has a layer of onions on the bottom of the
pan.

Do not add water.

Stew over a low flame until spinach wilts.

Pour off excess juice.

Serve chopped with slice of lemon.

Stuffed Holiday Squash™

1 large kabocha squash (about 4% Ibs), 3/4 cup raw brown rice, 44 cup raw wild
rice, rye or wheat berries, or more brown rice, 22 cups vegetable stock or
purified water, 1 cup onion diced, 3 cloves garlic minced, cup fresh peas
shelled, or sprouted lentils, 9/4 cup celery diced, °/4 cup yellow or red bell
pepper diced, 42 cup unsulphured raisins or prunes (pit prunes and chop), 1 tsp
each of sage and savory, 2 tsp thyme, 1/3 cup fresh parsley finely chopped, and
4 cup fresh orange juice.

Yvonne Nienstadt says: “I love the texture and taste of this Japanese squash. It’s
very meaty and sweet, but you could use pumpkin, turban, or acorn squash too
(cut the latter in half and seed). You may also use 2 or 3 smaller-sized squashes
rather than a large one. This makes a very attractive presentation, especially if
the squash are of different sizes.”

Cook rice and wild rice together in vegetable stock for 45 minutes or until rice is
done.

Using stock to cook the grain adds both nutrition and flavor.

Just save your vegetable trimmings, for carrots, parsnips, chard stems or greens,
celery, celery root, onion all work well.

Avoid cabbage family veggies as they impart a strong flavor.

Cover with pure water and simmer until done.

Use in soups, to make sauces or what have you.

Carefully cut the top off of the squash as you would when carving a pumpkin.
Remove seeds.

Place squash face down on baking pan together with the squash lid and prebake
for 25 to 30 minutes in a 350° F oven.
338 THE GERSON THERAPY

Take care not to overcook; a mushy squash cannot be stuffed.

Place onion, garlic, peas, and celery in a pot and cook on low for 20 minutes to
barely tenderize.

Add diced pepper, raisins, herbs, citrus juice, and cooked rice, mixing well.

Fill squash with stuffing, packing it down.

Return to oven and bake 25 to 30 minutes, or until squash is tender, but still
firm.

If there is extra filling, bake in a covered casserole with a tablespoon of stock or
juice, or fill a bell pepper or two and do the same.

To serve, arrange a platter with fresh kale or other leafy greens.

Place squash in center of platter and artistically prop squash lid up against
squash.

Spoon out each helping, making sure to get some of the delicious squash meat.
Alternatively, if squash is cooled a bit before serving, it may be sliced in wedges.
Ladle Parsley Yogurt Sauce (see recipe below under Sauces and Dips) over each
portion, if dairy is allowed; otherwise, a squeeze of orange juice adds a bit of
zing. Enjoy!

Stuffed Squash™

3-4 acorn squash, 42 cup onion diced, 42 cup celery diced, 4 cup carrot diced,
144 cup cooked brown rice, V2 cup lentils sprouted, 'A cup raisins or chopped
prunes soaked and drained, 3 tsp fresh parsley minced, 44 tsp rubbed sage, 14
tsp thyme, and 1 large clove of garlic crushed.

Slice squash lengthwise and remove seeds.

Combine remaining ingredients; fill squash halves.

Cover and bake at 300-325° F for 14 hours, or until squash is tender.

Delicious with Apricot Sauce or Golden Gravy (see under Sauces and Dips).

Try using 6-8 whole cloves garlic for a delicious mild flavor. Crushing the fresh
garlic releases its strong aromatic oils, whereas using garlic uncut imparts a very
mild flavor.

Stir-Steamed Snow Peas Medley*

1 Ib snow peas, 1 bunch bok choy, 1 medium zucchini, 1 medium crookneck
yellow squash, 1 small red onion, 1 carrot, 1 leek, 1 cup orange juice, 1 tbsp
honey, 1 tbsp vinegar, and 1 tsp of allspice.

Clean all vegetables, removing stem from snow peas, slicing white stalk and
green leaf of bok choy into strips, slicing yellow squash lengthwise and then into
half circles.

You can make attractive planks out of the zucchini by trimming off each end,
and then cutting in half, then half again.

Stand each barrel of squash on end and slice down into 1/8" planks.

Dice red onion, then slice carrots oriental style as thin as possible at a 45-degree
Recipes 339

angle into ovals.

Slice leek in similar fashion across stalk into ovals.

Put orange juice, honey, allspice, and vinegar into a blender, then pour into a
suitable-sized steam pot.

Cover with all the vegetables and simmer 15—20 minutes until tender. Very
succulent!

String Beans

1 lb green beans (cut tips, wash, and cut into any size piece desired). Add: 1
onion chopped, some soup stock (just enough to keep beans moist).
Stew approximately 50 minutes (until tender).

Sweet Potato

Cut off tips and wash.

Perforate potato with knife to let steam escape and place in casserole (covered
for soft skin, uncovered for crisp skin).

Bake in low oven for 2 to 24 hours.

Tomatoes, Grilled

Slice tomatoes in half.

Put in pan, sliced side up, and cover each half with chopped onions. Bake in a
low oven 1 hour.

Save juice to put into soup.

Green Tomato Mincemeat

1 qt green tomatoes, 2 oz golden raisins, 1 cup brown sugar, 14 cup water, 2 oz
seeded raisins, 4 tsp cloves, cup wine vinegar, along with 1 pt of tart apples.
Put tomatoes through coarse chopper.

Combine all ingredients except apples.
Heat to tender about 30 minutes, stirring.

Add chopped apples and cook until thick.

Tomatoes Stuffed with Mixed Vegetables

4 tomatoes (hollowed out as the vessel), vegetables: a variety, as much as
desired, 2 tomatoes and 6 garlic cloves (the sauce).

Wash tomatoes well.

Hollow out the 4 tomatoes.

Cut the vegetables into small pieces and boil in a little water for half an hour.
Put cooked vegetables in the tomatoes and place them in a baking dish without
the lid.

In the blender, blend the 2 tomatoes and garlic.

Spread sauce on top of each tomato.

Preheat oven to 350 degrees for 10 minutes.

Turn it off and put tomatoes in for another 10 minutes.

Zucchini

Combine: sliced zucchini, raw chopped onion, chopped tomatoes, and a touch
340 THE GERSON THERAPY

of soup stock.

Stew for 20 minutes or cut squash into small pieces and place in a baking dish.
In the blender, blend the tomatoes, onion, and 4 garlic cloves. Pour sauce over
squash and bake 112 hours at 200-250° F.

Zucchini and Rice

44 lb organic brown rice, 1 carrot, 1 zucchini, and 2 garlic cloves.

Wash the rice and vegetables well.

Put rice in a baking dish and add chopped up parsley, carrot, celery, and
zucchini squash.

At the same time blend tomato and garlic in the blender and spread on top of
the rice and vegetables.

Bake in the oven for 144 hours at 250°F.

Zucchini and Tomatoes

6 small zucchini sliced, 1 medium or large onion chopped, 2-3 tomatoes
chopped, plus garlic and herbs to taste (thyme, mace, marjoram). Saute onion,

tomatoes, and seasonings in a little water.
Add zucchini when half done, and simmer.
Serve as a vegetable or potato topping.

Spaghetti with Beetballs’N

Wash 1 medium spaghetti squash and cut in half.

Scoop out seeds and place cut side down on baking sheet.

Bake in low oven for 2 hours or until tender.

Or, place cut side up in a large covered pot with 1" water and steam over low
flame for 1 hour or until done.

Note: Spaghetti squash is a yellow hard winter squash developed by a Japanese
farmer some 30 years ago. When cooked, it comes out in strands like spaghetti. It
is now widely available especially in organic growers’ circles.

Spaghetti Beetball Sauce

2 lb ripe tomatoes (6-8 large), 3-5 cloves garlic minced, 1 medium onion diced
fine, 1 green pepper diced, 2 stalks celery diced, or 1 small fennel bulb diced, 2
small zucchini sliced, or 1 cup eggplant cubed, 4 tsp fresh parsley minced, pinch
each of rosemary, thyme, sage, and marjoram,” and 4 tsp fennel seeds.

Cook whole tomatoes over a low flame for 30-35 minutes or until tender. To
ensure a thick, rich sauce, pour off the extra juice drawn from the tomatoes
during cooking.**

Put drained tomatoes through food mill or sieve to remove skins and seeds.
Pour sauce back into pot and add remaining veggies and seasonings. Cover and
stew over low flame for 1 hour or until veggies are done to your liking.

For a little extra bite add a dash or two of wine vinegar with a tsp of honey.

*Basil and oregano, both favorite Italian seasonings, are not allowed on the Gerson Therapy
owing to the aromatic oils they contain.
Recipes 341

“Please be sure to keep extra tomato liquid for soup or gravy, or better still, drink as a hot broth
immediately. It's delicious.

Beetballs

2 tsp parsley minced, 1 small onion minced, 1 medium beet grated, and 3-4
medium carrots grated. Or, 1 cup eggplant ground, 42 cup Essene
342 THE GERSON THERAPY

rye bread or saltless and fatless rye, 1 cup of 2-day-old lentils germinated,” 1
small bunch endive, spinach or young chard finely chopped, and 2-3 cloves
garlic minced.

Put lentils and eggplant (if used) through food grinder or Norwalk® juicer
using grid #2.

Mix with bread crumbs and remaining veggies.

Mix well.

Form into 2" balls and place on baking sheet well sprinkled with oat or rye meal
to prevent sticking.

Cover and bake in low oven for 1 hour.

Uncover and bake 1 hour more.

Arrange cooked spaghetti squash on a plate with one or two beetballs, cover
with sauce and enjoy!

Variations of this recipe: Use 3 large white or 3 medium sweet potatoes in place
of ground lentils.

Boil sweet potatoes until tender, then put through food mill or grinder with
skins. Proceed as with above.

Replace bread crumbs with 4% cup cooked brown rice or 1/3 cup oat flakes
ground in the Norwalk juicer.

‘Cover lentils with distilled water and allow to soak (germinate) overnight. Drain.

Veggie Loaf¥N

Grind in the Norwalk® juicer or in a food grinder: 2 cups lentils germinated, “4
cup fresh parsley, 142 cups eggplant diced or parsnips or yams.

Add: 1 cup onions diced fine, 4 cup beets grated, *4 cup carrots grated,

1 cup celery diced fine, 3 cloves garlic minced, 1 42 cups cooked brown rice,
pinch thyme, pinch of rubbed sage, pinch of tarragon, and 1 tsp lemon juice.
Bake in covered pan in low oven for approximately 2 hours.

Uncover and baste with Golden Sauce or Tomato Sauce.

Bake another 30 minutes to 1 hour.

Serve with extra sauce.

Veggie Stroganoff*N

1 cup onion diced, 1 cup eggplant diced, 114 cups cauliflowerets or cabbage, 142
cups sliced carrots or tomatoes, 1 cup broccoli or green pepper, and 1 cup celery
or zucchini sliced.

Stew vegetables for 142 hours until tender (you may want to add soft veggies
like tomatoes and zucchini last).

Set aside and let cool to 140° F while making sauce as follows: combine

1 tbsp wine or cider vinegar, 1 tsp dillweed, 2 cups yogurt, 1 cup cottage cheese
(nonfat, saltless), and green onions or parsley for garnish.

Blend sauce until smooth.
Recipes 343

Mix with warm veggies.
Serve over a bed of baked spaghetti squash or cooked brown rice. Garnish with
chopped green onions or parsley.

Soups

Potato Soup

1 large onion, small celery knob, parsley, 2 large potatoes, 1 leek, plus
2 _ stalks celery and 2 quarts water.

Clean and dice all vegetables.

Place in covered saucepan with water.

Bring to boil.

Lower heat.

Cover. Simmer 2-3 hours.

Mash through food mill.

Special Soup (also called “Hippocrates soup”—see its
recipe cited at the start of this chapter or see the Gerson
Therapy Handbook, page 80)

Tomato Soup with Lemon and Garlic

2 to 3 large tomatoes, 1 clove garlic, 1 bay leaf, juice of ‘i lemon, 2 onions, 1 tsp
oat flakes, 1 tsp brown sugar, and 'A cup soup stock (see Special Soup recipe
above).

Dice all vegetables.

Place vegetables, soup stock, sugar, and lemon in covered saucepan and cook
for 1 hour.

Mash through food mill.

Replace in saucepan.

Add oat flakes and cook 5 more minutes.

Tomato and Mint Soup

2 Ibs tomatoes (Roma preferably), 5 green onions (scallions), 2 small cooking

apples, 5 tbsp cider vinegar, 1 tsp brown sugar, 2 large lemons, 6 or 8 sprigs

fresh mint, and 200 g (6-8 oz) of nonfat yogurt (optional). Chop tomatoes, slice

spring onions, core and slice apple.

Put these into a saucepan with the cider vinegar and sugar.

Bring to a boil and simmer gently for 30 minutes.

Put through food mill.

Either leave to cool, adding last ingredients later, or add the lemon juice and
beat in the yogurt (if used) immediately.

Just before serving, add the chopped mint, leaving some scattered over the top
of the soup for decoration.

Makes 4 generous or 6 small servings.
344 THE GERSON THERAPY

Tomato and Mint SoupSs¢

Tomato Soup with Potato and Onion

2 large tomatoes, 1 medium onion, 1 tsp brown sugar, 2 medium potatoes, 1
tsp wine vinegar, and a small piece of bay leaf.

Wash and dice all vegetables.

Place all ingredients except sugar in covered saucepan with water to cover.
Cook over low flame for 1 hour.

Mash through food mill and add sugar to taste.

SAUCES AND DIPS

Apricot Sauce

44 cup dried apricots unsulfured, 1 cup pure water heated, and 44 cup fresh
apple or orange juice.

Wash and drain apricots.

Combine with water and soak for several hours.

Add juice and stew over low flame until apricots are very tender, about 12
hours.

Puree sauce in blender or by putting through Foley food mill or the Norwalk®
juicer.
Recipes

Baba Ghanoush

1 large eggplant, 2 cloves garlic, 1 tsp lemon juice, 1 tbsp chopped parsley, and
lemon wedges.

Bake eggplant for 1 hour and when cool enough, peel, and drain off excess
liquid, squeezing gently.

Blend with garlic until fairly smooth, add lemon juice and parsley.

Mix well.

Serve with raw dipping vegetables such as celery, carrots, cauliflower, and
peppers.

Golden Gravy

1 small potato quartered, 4 carrots sliced, 2 tsp cider vinegar or lemon juice, 1
cup soup stock or water, 1 small onion diced, 4 tsp dill, marjoram or thyme, and
1 tsp parsley minced.

Combine ingredients and stew over low flame for 142 to 2 hours or until
tender.

Remove potato skins and puree.

Golden Sauce

Combine in a covered casserole: 1 small sweet potato or yam quartered, 2-3
carrots coarsely chopped, 1 small onion diced, 4% cup soup stock, 4% cup
tangerine or orange juice, and a pinch of thyme and rosemary.

Bake in low oven until tender (approx. 2 hours).

Put through Foley food mill or spin in blender adding more juice to achieve
desired consistency.

Add 2 tsp parsley and serve.

Ketchup/Catsup

3 tomatoes, 14 head of garlic, 42 onion, 1/16 cup ( % 0z) vinegar, “4 tsp dill,
and 44 cup Sucanat (organic brown sugar).

Place all ingredients in pan and bring to a boil.

Cook until tender and put through food mill or liquefier until smooth.
350 THE GERSON THERAPY

Parsley Yogurt SauceDAIRY

42 cup minced onion, 1 tsp fresh grated horseradish or 4 tsp dried horseradish
(optional), 1 cup nonfat yogurt, 1 tbsp lemon or lime juice, 1 tsp maple syrup or
honey, and 44 cup minced parsley.

Cook onions over low heat until tender and translucent.

Remove from heat and let cool slightly.

Blend onions with horseradish, yogurt, citrus juice, and sweetener in blender
until smooth.

Stir in parsley.

Plum Sauce

44 Ib plums, 1 tsp lemon juice, 1 slice toast diced, 1 tsp brown sugar, and 2 tsp
bread crumbs.

Wash plums.

Remove pits and place in saucepan with water to half cover.

Cook 15 minutes and strain through food mill.

Add sugar, bread crumbs, and lemon juice.

Replace in saucepan.

Cook 3 minutes longer.

Serve over toast if desired.

Tomato Salsa

1 medium tomato finely chopped, green onions or 1 medium red onion, 2 tbsp
fresh coriander leaves (cilantro) chopped, and 3 tbsp lemon juice.

Combine ingredients (don’t overdo the lemon juice), cover, and chill Best

eaten fresh but can be kept for up to 2 days in the refrigerator.

Tomato Sauce, No-Wait (this sauce is raw)

1 Ib Roma Tomatoes cut into pieces, 3-4 cloves of garlic, 3 sprigs of parsley
herbs, and 1 tsp linseed oil.
Place linseed oil in blender and start.
Begin adding pieces of tomato and other ingredients a little at a time. Allow to
whip for a minute or so until all ingredients are mixed.
Yields about 2-3 cup of sauce.
Combine in large pan: 4-6 large tomatoes, 4-5 large onions peeled and sliced, 1
large or 2 medium potatoes with skin diced, 2-3 cloves garlic, a pinch of
marjoram, and a pinch of thyme.
Stew and let simmer for 1 hour and pass through Foley food mill.
One can also add a little celery or green pepper for taste.

Tomato Sauce, French

lonion, ¥% stick celery, small carrot, 1/2pounds tomatoes, a few sprigs of flat
leaf parsley, 1 clove garlic, and 1 bay leaf.
Recipes 351

Tomato Sauce

Cook chopped onion, carrot, celery tomatoes, parsley, garlic, and bay leaf.
Puree and serve hot or cold.
Makes 1% pints.

FRUITS AND DESSERT

Fruits

Most fresh fruits can be eaten unpeeled when ripe.

Of course, fruits like oranges and bananas should be peeled.

Always wash fresh fruit.

Dried fruits should be washed in clean, lukewarm distilled water and soaked
overnight in water (little more than to cover).

Use the same water and cook in covered saucepan until tender.

Dried fruits must be unsulfured.

The following fruit recipes are taken from Dr. Max Gerson’s personal files.

Desserts

Desserts should never replace the meals or juices of the therapy.

At the risk of sounding like your mother, we advise to “clean your plate before
dessert, dear!”

Do not eat or use as ingredients in desserts: ice cream, fat, white flour, baking
soda, candy, chocolate, cream, or salt. Have fun!
352 THE GERSON THERAPY

Sugar

Use only brown (Sueanat) or raw sugar, light honey, maple syrup, or un-
sulfured molasses.

Syrup
Boil 1 lb brown sugar in 1 quart of water and 1 cup apple juice until dissolved.
Keep in covered jar.

Apples, Baked

2 medium apples, 1 tsp raisins, and 2 tbsp water.

Wash, core, and cut apples in half.

Place with raisins in pan or baking dish in oven for about 15 minutes until done
then broil under flame until golden brown about 5 minutes. Apple halves
should stay whole.

Honey may be added to raisins to taste.

Apple and Banana

44 cup applesauce, 1 raw sliced banana, and juice of 12 lemon.

Serve raw or place applesauce and banana in covered saucepan and heat
slowly.

Serve with lemon juice.

Apple Cake with Maple Yogurt™4!RY

1% lbs cooking apples, 1 lemon, 1 0z rolled oats, 1 oz oatmeal, 2 oz sultanas or
raisins, 4 oz brown sugar, 4 oz whole wheat flour, 1 tsp potassium baking
powder, % cup fresh apple juice, yogurt, and maple syrup.

Put peeled and chopped apples into a large bow] and sprinkle with lemon juice.
Combine rolled oats, oatmeal, raisins, sugar, flour, and baking powder and mix
well

Stir this mixture into the apples.

Pour mixture into cake pan and bake at 350° F for 20-35 minutes or until lightly
browned on top.

Serve with yogurt mixed with 1-2 tbsp maple syrup.

Apple sauce, Cooked
3 medium apples pared, cored, and sliced.
Add honey or brown sugar to taste.
Put apple slices in saucepan half covered with cold water.
Boil until soft, about 15 minutes.
Put through food mill and mix with honey.

Applesauce, Fresh
3 medium apples pared, cored, and sliced.
Recipes 353

Add honey or brown sugar to taste.
Run apples through the grinder portion of the juicer.
Season to taste and enjoy.

Apple Spice Cake™

Combine: ‘cup honey or maple syrup, 1 cup fresh applesauce, 142 cups oat
flour, and % cup whole wheat flour or triticale flour.

Sift together: %@ cup crude brown sugar, a pinch of allspice, a pinch of mace,
tsp coriander, and 1 tsp Featherweight sodium-free baking powder" (optional).

Add: 2 cups raisins or chopped dates.

Combine wet and dry ingredients.

Pour into nonstick oblong bake pan.

Mix crumb topping and sprinkle on top.

Bake at 325° F for 40 minutes or until cake tests done.

Serve with a spoonful of fresh applesauce or nonfat yogurt. Enjoy.

‘This is a potassium-based baking powder. If you are a cancer patient, check with your health
professional first before using it.

Crumb Topping for Apple Spice Cake

2 cup rolled oats, 1/3 cup maple syrup or honey, a pinch of allspice, and a
pinch of mace.

Buzz oats briefly in blender to make a finer flake.

Mix spices with oats.

Mix in enough sweetener to make a crumbly mixture.

Apple Streusel Pie

One 8" or 9" pie crust (see below), 12 mediuin green apples sliced thin, 13cup
crude brown sugar or ‘cup honey, 2 tsp. cornstarch or oat flour,
2-3 tsp lemon or orange juice, 2 cup dried currants or chopped dates, plus a
pinch of coriander, mace, and allspice.

Combine dry ingredients.

Coat apples.

Drizzle on honey (if used) and juice.

Fill pie crust.

Sprinkle on topping.

Bake at 300-325? F for 1 hour and 15 minutes or until apples are tender.

Crumb Topping for Apple Streusel Pie

28 cup oat flour, 3 tsp crude brown sugar, pinch allspice, and 1 cup honey or
maple syrup.
Apple-Sweet Potato Pudding

1 tsp raisins, /2cup bread crumbs", cup orange juice, 1 sweet potato (boiled,
peeled, sliced), 1 apple (raw, peeled, sliced), and 1 tsp of brown sugar.

Place sweet potato slices in baking dish with apple slices and raisins spread
with bread crumbs, sugar, and orange juice and bake in 350 degree oven for 30
354 THE GERSON THERAPY

minutes.
Serve hot with 3 tsp buttermilk or yogurt if permitted.

"Never use commercial bread crumbs (see recipe for bread crumbs in the bread section that
follows in this chapter or on p. 100 of the Gerson Therapy Handbook)

Apple TartPAIRyY

’ cup warm water (105-110° F), 1 tbsp crude brown sugar (Sucanat), 1
package dry yeast, 23 cup churned buttermilk, nonfat yogurt or apple juice”,
cup crude brown sugar (Sucanat), 2 / cups oat flour, 1 cup whole wheat or
triticale flour, 9-10 medium apples (Gala, Pippin, and Golden Delicious are
good), 4 tbsp maple syrup, or liquid Fruit Source”,

2 tbsp brown rice syrup*, /2 cup date sugar (dried ground dates), 1 2 tsp of
allspice, and "4 tsp mace or coriander.

“Use only apple juice if patient is not yet allowed dairy.

*“Fruit Source is a sweetener derived from natural fruit sugars.

‘Rice syrup, derived from malted rice, is a thick and creamy syrup that needs to be thinned by
either the maple syrup or Fruit Source.

Sprinkle yeast onto warm water into which 1 tbsp crude brown sugar has been
dissolved.

Let stand for 5 to 10 minutes or until frothy.

Warm buttermilk, yogurt, orjuice to 100°F

Add crude brown sugar and stir until dissolved.

Stir buttermilk into yeast mix, then add oat flour and beat vigorously.

Stir in enough of the remaining flour to make a stiff dough.

Knead on a floured bread board, adding only enough flour to keep dough from
sticking.

Knead until smooth and elastic, approximately 5 to 10 minutes.

Place in a bowl, cover with tea towel, and let rise in a warm place until double
in bulk, about 144 hours.

Punch down and let rise again.

Divide dough in half.

On floured board, press each part into a 15" x 9" rectangle.

Place on separate nonstick bake sheets, or regular sheets that have been
thoroughly coated with oat flakes to prevent sticking.

Prick surface with fork, leaving 1’ border around the edges.

Cover and let rise until doubled, approximately 40 minutes.

Quarter, core, and slice apples, arranging each sliced quarter over dough, as
you cut it.

Place the flat side down and the skin side up, fanning the slices out slightly.
Leave about a 14" border.

Mix maple and brown rice syrups.

Using a pastry brush, coat the apples with the syrup.

Combine date sugar and spices and sprinkle over apples.

Bake at 325°F for 30 minutes or until bread is lightly browned.
Recipes 355

Serve as is or with a spoonful of nonfat yogurt or yogurt cheese (see below)
lightly sweetened with honey or maple syrup.

Note: Non-Gerson family members could enjoy this dessert with a scoop of
nonfat fruit sweetened frozen yogurt—Cascadian Farm Vanilla (the milk is
organic) or Stars Vanilla Bean are two brands enjoyed in moderation.

Yogurt cheese is made by draining non-fat yogurt through a stainless steel or
nylon sieve lined with a cotton tea towel or cheese cloth with a bow] beneath to
catch the whey.

Refrigerate and drain until desired consistency is achieved, anywhere from 2 to
8 hours. A short drainage period will yield a thickened yogurt;

longer periods will produce a cream-cheese-like texture. For our purposes, a
thickened yogurt texture is what we want.

Apricots

1% lb fresh apricots, 1 tsp cornstarch dissolved in 2 tsp cold water, and 2 tsp
brown sugar.

Cut apricots in halves and remove pits.

Place in pot with boiling water and cook for 10 minutes.

Add cornstarch during last 2 minutes.

Add sugar when cool.

Banana (Broiled)

1 banana and 1 tsp brown sugar.

Cut banana in half lengthwise, then add 1 tsp brown sugar and a few drops
lemon.

Place in pan and broil under low flame for 10 minutes.

Serve hot.

Banana and Apple

1 banana (peeled and finely mashed), 1 apple (peeled, cored, grated), and 10
tsp of raisins.

Mix banana and apple beating thoroughly with fork or eggbeater.

Add raisins and serve.

Banana and Figs

1 banana, 3 figs (fresh), and juice of 1 orange.
Chop banana and figs fine and mix well with orange juice.
Fill orange peel with this mixture and serve.

Cherries (Stewed)

1 Ib cherries (washed, stemmed), 1 tsp potato starch, and 2 tsp brown sugar.
Place cherries in saucepan with water to cover.

Cook 10 minutes over low flame.

Add potato starch dissolved in 2 tsp cold water.

Add to boiling cherries.
Cook 2 minutes longer.
Chill and serve.
356 THE GERSON THERAPY

Currants

44s 1b red currants and 3 tsp brown sugar.

Clean and wash currants thoroughly before removing stems.

Place in dish, add sugar, and serve.

Buttermilk or yogurt (if permitted) sweetened with brown sugar may be used.
for sauce.

Fruit Combination

3 cups fresh cherries and apricots (halved, sliced, pitted), 2 cups water, 42 cup
brown sugar, and 2 tsp cornstarch dissolved in 1/3 cup cold water. Place fruit
with water and sugar in saucepan.

Boil gently, slowly for 10 minutes.

Add cornstarch.

Cook 3 minutes longer.

Cool and serve.

Glazed Pear Halves

4-5 ripe pears and 4 tbsp honey or Sucanat (organic dried cane sugar). Cut ripe
pears into halves, and core.

Add about 4 oz of water to honey or Sucanat and mix well.

Place pear halves in baking dish and pour sugar mixture over fruit.

Bake in slow oven (275°F) until done.

Baste with juice if necessary.

Frozen YogurtS> 0A1RY

4s cup stewed fruit (cherries, apricots) and 1 Ib fat-free yogurt.

Spoon yogurt into a thin mesh strainer that has been lined with two layers of
cheesecloth, and place it over a deep bowl

Let it drain into the bow] in the refrigerator for about 30 minutes. Spoon

the drained yogurt into ice cube trays and freeze.

Mix fruit and yogurt cubes in a food processor or the grinder of your K & K
juicer or Norwalk® juicer until the consistency is thick and smooth. Serve
immediately.
357 THE GERSON THERAPY

Oatmeal Cake

4 cup oatmeal (dry oats), 2 grated or blended carrots, honey and raisins as
desired.

Combine all the above ingredients in a baking dish.

Put in the oven without a lid and bake for 45 minutes at 250°F.

Oatmeal Cookies» AIRY

1 cup applesauce, 1 cup rye flour, 1 cup raisins, 4 cup churned buttermilk, 12
cup brown sugar, 42 cup molasses, 2 cups oatmeal, and 1 pkg yeast.

Mix and let stand 10 minutes.

Drop from teaspoon and bake in moderate oven about 20 minutes.

Pasha™ (Uncooked Cheesecake) DAIRY

14 cup fresh orange juice strained, 12 cup chopped dried fruit, 4 cups soft or
medium curd cottage cheese, 42 cup honey or ¥4cup brown sugar, plus raisins,
dates, papaya, peaches, prunes, etc.

Mix all ingredients.

Pour batter into a strainer or colander lined with a clean cotton cloth (muslin).
Cover with a plate to weight it down.

Place in a bow] or pan and refrigerate for 5-10 hours or until dry and firm.

Turn out onto a plate and slice.

Good as is, or ona slice of Essene bread.

Peaches

44 Ib peaches (skinned) and 2 tsp brown sugar.

Wash peaches.

Place in boiling water 42 minute, drain and peel.

Cut in halves.

Remove pits and place in saucepan with boiling water.
Cover. Simmer for 10 minutes.

Cool.

Add sugar and serve chilled.

Pears

1 large pear (peeled, cored, halved) and 1 tsp brown sugar.
Place pears in saucepan with water to half cover.
Add sugar and cook 30 minutes

Plums

1 Ib plums and 2 tsp brown sugar.

Wash plums, cut in half, and remove pits. (Plums can also be cooked whole.)
Place in saucepan with water to cover.

Cook 15 minutes.

Remove, cool, and add sugar.

Serve chilled.

Prune and Apricots (Dried)
358 THE GERSON THERAPY

44 Ib of each of the prunes and apricots plus 1/3 cup barley.
Soak prunes and apricots overnight in water to cover.

Use same water and boil with barley.

Cool and serve.

Prune and Banana Whip

1 cup dried prunes (soaked, cooked), 2 small bananas, 44 lemon juice, and 1
tsp brown sugar.

Whip together thoroughly and put in refrigerator for 1 hour.

May be served in slices decorated with sweetened yogurt (if permitted).

Pumpkin Pudding PieYN (Unbaked)

Pinch of allspice, pinch of coriander, pinch of mace, 2 tsp unsulfured molasses
(optional), one 8" or 9" pie crust, 42 cup tapioca, 142 cup dates, pitted and
chopped, 11/3 cup apple juice or water, and 144 to 2 cups mashed pumpkin.

Soak tapioca and dates in juice overnight.

In morning, stew over low flame using a burner pad to diffuse heat. Cook for

30 minutes until thick, stirring frequently to prevent sticking. Purée tapioca

and pumpkin in Foley food mill or processor.

Add spices and molasses.

Pour into prepared pie crust and chill thoroughly (may put in freezer for
several hours until very firm); otherwise cutting will be a problem.

Serve with a dollop of honey-sweetened yogurt cheese (see under Apple Tart) if
desired (and permitted by physician).

Variation: Use cooked squash, yams, or sweet potatoes in place of pumpkin.

Thin Buttermilk Crust 4IRY

1 cup oat flour, 1/3 cup churned buttermilk, apple juice or water (cold), 2 tsp
honey, pinch allspice or mace, and 1 tsp Featherweight (sodium-free) baking
powder (optional).

Mix dry ingredients.

Add honey and just enough liquid to make a stiff dough.

Knead lightly to mix.

Roll out on floured board or between layers of waxed paper.

Carefully place in 8" or 9" pie plate which has been thoroughly coated with oat

flakes to prevent sticking.

Trim excess dough and flute edges or make indentations with fork. Chill crust,

then bake at 325°F for 10-15 minutes or until lightly browned.

Note: This will not be your traditional flaky crust, so roll out thin.

Raised Pie Crust’N
1 cup oat flour, ‘4 cup potato flour (or use more oat flour), 1 cup triticale or
whole wheat flour, 1 tsp honey or brown sugar, ‘4 cup warm water, and 1 tsp

baker's yeast.
Sprinkle yeast into warm water mixed with honey.
Recipes 359

When frothy add flour and mix well

Let rise in a warm place for 1 hour.

Knead on floured board for 5 minutes.

Let rest for 10 minutes and roll out on floured board.

Place in 8" or 9" pie plate that has been thoroughly coated on the bottom with
rolled oat flakes.

Flute edge.

Let rise for 15 minutes.

Bake at 375°F for 20-25 minutes.

Variation: Omit yeast; use just enough cold water to make a stiff dough.
Roll out between sheets of floured wax paper.

Carefully place in pie plate.

Chill crust.

Then bake at 350°F for 10-12 minutes.

Essene Bread Crust¥N

2 cups Essene bread crumbs, 44 cup honey, and 3 tsp oat flour.

Toast slices of bread in slow oven until lightly brown.

Let cool.

Grind coarsely by running through grinder or Norwalk®.

Add flour, then honey.

Press into pie plate that has been well coated with rolled oat flakes. Chill for 1
hour.

Bake at 350°F for 10-12 minutes.

Roll, then fill.

Rhubarb

4 Ib rhubarb (washed and cut into 1" pieces), 2 to 3 tsp brown sugar (to taste),
and 1 tsp cornstarch (if desired).

Place washed rhubarb in saucepan.

Simmer 15 to 20 minutes.

Dissolve cornstarch in a little cold water.

Add to rhubarb and allow to stew a few more minutes.

Cool and add sugar.

Note: Combine rhubarb with other sweet fruits such as apples, peaches, or
apricots (fresh or dried).

Stewed Fruit Combinations

Together, use pears and plums, plums and applesauce, peaches and plums,
apricots and plums, apricots and sliced apples, or peaches and pears.

Note: Stewed fruits may be served on toasted rye bread by placing a thick layer
of fruit on top and allowing it to soak through for 12 hour before serving.

Sunshine Smoothie’?

In a blender or food processor container, combine 1 cup nonfat organic yogurt,
4 cup orange juice, 2 tbsp honey, 1 cup cut-up fresh fruit, and 4 cup crushed
ice (made from distilled water); process until smooth.
360 THE GERSON THERAPY

Sweet Potato and Apple Bake®s¢

12 oz sweet potatoes, 3 eating apples, allspice, a little brown sugar, and a little
water.

Cook the sweet potatoes gently in their skins until tender.

Allow to cool.

Slice and put into baking dish, alternating with layers of apple.

Over each layer, sprinkle some water, a little sugar, and some allspice. Bake
covered for 20 minutes at 350°F, then remove cover and bake for an additional
10 minutes.

Sweet Potato Stuffed Oranges

3 lbs sweet potatoes (or yams), freshly made applesauce, 8 orange peel halves,
and 4 oz orange juice.

Boil sweet potatoes (or yams) until done.

Peel and mash with orange juice and applesauce to make it a smooth, stuffing
paste.

Put stuffing into orange peel halves and put a dab of applesauce on top. Can be
reheated in a cake tray.

Makes 4 servings.

Recipe may actually stuff 10 or more orange peels and may make more than 4
servings.

Sweet Rice™2

144 cups organic brown rice, 4 cups water, 1 cup organic brown sugar (Sucanat),
and 1 cup organic raisins.

Wash the rice and put into pot with the water.

Once the water begins to boil, add the sugar and raisins and reduce the heat.
Maintain on low heat until the rice is tender.

DAIRY

Dairy is temporarily forbidden in the beginning of the Gerson Therapy.
Consult with your Gerson-trained health professional or physician before
adding any dairy to your diet.

After 6 to 12 weeks on the therapy, upon doctor's orders, animal proteins are
cautiously added to the diet in the form of pot cheese, yogurt and cottage cheese,
and churned (not cultured) buttermilk, all made from nonfat milk (preferably
raw) and without salt.

When starting the proteins, it must be done slowly and carefully. Just one
tablespoon at lunch and supper of the solid proteins and 1% cup of the
buttermilk per meal.

After 3 to 4 days, these levels can be increased until, at 3 weeks, one cup of
yogurt or churned (not cultured) buttermilk per meal have been added.

While adding the dairy proteins, a Gerson patient needs to watch for signs that
Recipes 361

the body is tolerating these new foods. Indigestion, flatulence (intestinal
production of gas), and nasal mucus production are signs the enzyme activity
cannot yet handle the dairy products. The patient should reduce or, after
consulting the Gerson-trained physician, eliminate the proteins for several more
weeks.

Yogurt” A1RY

Combine: 2 quarts raw nonfat (not low-fat) milk heated to 118°F, 1 pkg
“Bulgarian Yogurt Culture” or 3 tsp yogurt (purchased or saved froma previous
batch).

Pour mixture into sterilized glass jar(s).

Incubate at 110°-115° F for 4-8 hours by one of the following methods:

¢ Electric yogurt maker

* In gas oven, above pilot light

¢ Inelectric oven, low heat (gauge heat with thermometer)

¢ Ina thermos

¢ Inacovered pan set in a container of warm water (change water to keep
warm)

Incubation time may vary, depending upon temperature.

The yogurt is ready when a toothpick inserted point first into the yo gurt

doesn’t fall over.

The yogurt becomes set a little more firmly after refrigeration.

This is a thin yogurt because it has no fat or processed dried milk added.

Be sure to save 3 tbsp for the starter for the next batch.

Yogurt Cheese!) AIRY

Yogurt cheese is made by hanging nonfat yogurt in a muslin sack over 11 sink or
bowl or in a muslin-lined strainer until it thickens to the consistency of cream
cheese, without the fat, in about 6 to 8 hours.

Cottage Cheese Loaf YN DAIRY

1 cup dry Essene or rye bread crumbs, 1 tbsp lemon juice or vinegar, 1-2 tsp
dried parsley, ‘4 tsp dill weed or tarragon, ‘4 tsp dry horseradish ( 1 tsp if
fresh), 2 cups mashed potatoes, 2 18cups dry curd cottage cheese, 42 cup sweet
red or green pepper, ‘4 cup celery diced, and 1 small onion diced.

Combine all ingredients except the last two.

Form into a loaf.

Place on garnished platter.

Top with decorative veggie slices.

Use watercress or endive for garnish plus slices of carrot, tomato, onion, and
green or red pepper for top.

Cottage CheeseYN DAIRY

‘4 gallon unpasteurized, nonfat milk (which may not be available). Makes
approx. 9 oz (1 cup) cheese.
Warm milk to body temperature (98° to 100°F) by placing unopened bottle of
milk in sink of warm water.
362 THE GERSON THERAPY

Incubate in warm place (near pilot light or in oven with light on).

It is best to leave milk in original container to prevent airborne bacteria or
molds from contaminating culture.

The incubation period ranges from about 24 to 30 hours. (Culture longer for a
sharper-tasting cheese.)

Shake several times during this period.

When curd has formed, it will rise to the top.

A harder curd can be formed by putting cheese (still in bottle) in sink of warm
water and gradually increasing temperature to 110° for soft curd, and to 120° for
farmer-style cheese.

Be careful not to overheat or you will destroy precious enzymes and beneficial
bacteria.

Use a thermometer to be safe.

Pour cheese into a strainer or colander lined with muslin or several layers of
cheesecloth.

Gather the corners of the cloth and press out whey.

You may place a weight on top to speed the process.

For creamvstyle cottage cheese add approx. ‘4 cup thick yogurt per cup of
finished cheese.

For herbed cottage cheese, season with any of the following: fresh chives,
crushed garlic, tarragon, parsley, dill weed, dill seed.

Let set for ‘4 hour before serving.

Variations: Add the juice of 1 or 2 lemons or 1/8 cup yogurt to the fresh milk
instead of letting it clabber naturally. These additions result in different flavors
and textures. Experiment to find the one you like the best. Enjoy!

Cottage Cheese Sour Cream®N PAIRV

4% cup yogurt, 1 tbsp lemon juice, and 1 cup dry curd cottage cheese.

Blend ingredients in blender.

Add any or all of the following: pressed garlic, grated horseradish, chives or
green onion, fresh mint, or dried dill weed.

Use to top baked potatoes or as dip for veggies.

BREADS

Bread can be used as a snack, after breakfast, or with a meal if the patient has a
good appetite.
Do not replace potatoes and vegetables with any of the breads.

Sourdough

Sourdough is sour fermented dough used as leaven. Don’t be put off by the
name, because sourdough breads don’t taste sour. They have a tangy flavor.
Sourdough is a white substance over which a colorless or gray liquor called
Recipes 363

hooch collects. Hooch enables sourdough to complete its fermentation.

You have to feed sourdough and keep it in the refrigerator because it is a living
thing that’s full of microorganisms. Colonies of these microorganisms can live
for many decades with proper care and feeding. You can use a starter batch
obtained from someone else to get your own colonies going or buy a
dehydrated starter or make it from scratch.

There are many different kinds of sourdough starters: white, yogurt, whole
wheat, sour rye, and so on. For patients on the Gerson Therapy, rye sourdough
is the recommended variety.

Sourdough Starter

1 tsp active dry yeast, 3 cups warm water (105° —115°F), and 3 4 cups rye flour.
Dissolve yeast in warm water in a large mixing bowl Set aside for about

5 minutes.

Gradually add flour, stirring until smooth with a wooden spoon.

Cover with cheesecloth; leave on counter in warm, draft-free place.

In about 24 hours the mixture will start to ferment.

Cover tightly with plastic wrap and leave for another 2 to 3 days.

Stir starter 2 or3 times a day.

Starter should be foamy at the end of this time. Put into a plastic container, glass
jar or crock with at least a 1-quart capacity.

Stir and cover but not with a tight-fitting top.

Feeding Sourdough

Put 1 cup sourdough in mixing bowl

Add 2% cups flour and 2 cups warm water. (This combination is known as
feeding.)

Mix thoroughly.

Leave on counter for 8 hours or overnight.

Be sure to replace 1 cup sourdough in the jar in the refrigerator.

Try to feed sourdough once a week or every 10 days.

Feeding is necessary to keep the culture alive and may add tang to its flavor.
(Note: Sourdough can be frozen).

General Rules Pertaining to Sourdough

* Use glass, stoneware, or plastic bowls. Don’t use metal. Wild yeast produces
acids that can corrode metal and thus kill the starter.

* Use a wooden spoon.

* Clean container about every week so that unwanted bacteria will not grow
and ruin your sourdough.

¢ Wipe up spilled sourdough immediately. It can stick like glue or cement.

* Keep covered with a loose-fitting cover in refrigerator.

Wholegrain Rye Bread

6 cups lukewarm water, sourdough starter, and 3 lbs rye flour or a 70/30 ratio
of rye flour to whole wheat flour.
364 THE GERSON THERAPY

Mix sourdough in water, add flour.

Leave covered and warm (180°F) for 12-24 hours.

Replace 1 cup sourdough to refrigerator as starter for next time.

Add: 2 cups lukewarm water, 2 lbs rinsed whole rye grain, and 2 lbs rolled rye
(use enough rye flour, maybe 2 Ibs, to hold dough together). Roll and cut dough to
fit loaf pans.

Smooth the surface with a wet hand and leave dough in a warm place to rise
for 2-5 hours.

The taste gets stronger the longer it is left to rise, and it will rise only a little.

Cut a furrow down the middle, about 44" to 42" deep.

Bake for 144 hours at 385°F

Take out of pans immediately and wrap in towels and turn upside down.

Do not cut for about 12 hours.

Bread can be frozen when lukewarm.

Bread Snack

1 slice of bread, spread with cottage cheese, topped with tomatoes, and
radishes or sprouts or 1 slice of bread topped with honey.

Bread Dressing

1 part chopped onions, 1 part chopped celery, 2-3 parts cubed grain bread, 1
part chopped parsley, 4 to 1 cup water, plus sage, garlic, and thyme.
Place in an uncovered casserole and bake in low oven for 2 hours.

Bread Crumbs

Toast leftover bread in the oven.
Run it through the food grinder.
Store in covered container in the refrigerator.

Sour Rye Bread (Black Bread Russian Style)

Note: Sour rye is a different sourdough culture.

You will need to make the sour rye sourdough starter from scratch and keep it
separate from your other starter.

8 cups freshly ground whole rye flour, 3 cups warm water, and 4% cup
sourdough culture.

Mix 7 cups of the rye flour with water and sourdough culture.

Cover and let stand in a warm place 12 to 18 hours.

Remove and save 42 cup of dough as a culture for next baking, and keep the
saved culture in a tightly closed jar in refrigerator.

Add remaining cup of rye flour and mix well.

Divide dough in half.

Form oblong loaf smaller than size of pan in lightly floured hands (using rye
flour).

Place gently into stainless steel baking pans.
Recipes 365

Do not press; allow space around sides of loaf.

Try dusting stainless steel pan with flour or rye meal, no oil.
Let rise for approximately 4 hour.

Bake at 350°F for 1 hour or more.

Makes two 2-Ib loaves.

Store tightly wrapped in refrigerator.

Sourdough Culture

In a wide-mouthed glass jar at least 1 quart in size, mix well the follow- ing
ingredients: 1 cup lukewarm distilled water, 2 tsp baking yeast, 1 tsp raw sugar,
and 1 cup rye flour.

Stir well once daily with a wooden spoon (never leave a metal spoon in starter).
Allow to sit for 3 to 5 days until sour odor is detected.

May cover loosely after 2nd day.

Remove 4% cup for bread recipe above.

Store covered in refrigerator adding half cup from dough after first rising.
Bring to room temperature 1 hour before starting each new recipe.

Sourdough Potato Rye Bread™

1 cup sourdough starter, 2 cups warm mashed potatoes, 11/3 cups potato
cooking water, 2 cups whole wheat or rye flour,” 44 cup molasses (unsul-
fured), and 1/3 tsp caraway or fennel seed.

Mix ingredients in large nonmetal bowl

Cover and let stand in warm place for several hours (or overnight for a very
sour loaf).

Add the following: 14 to 3 cups rye flour as needed to make a workable dough.
Turn onto floured board and knead for 5-10 minutes.

Let dough rest for 5 minutes, then form into round or baton-shaped loaves.
Place on nonstick bake sheet, or regular bake sheet (ungreased) that has been
well coated with raw oat flakes to prevent sticking.

Let bread rise until almost double (when bread does not spring back when
lightly touched).

Bake at 350°F for 50 minutes to 1 hour.

For a very chewy crust, place a pan of water in bottom of oven to create steam,
or baste bread several times during baking with water.

For soft crust, do not steam or baste.

Immediately wrap loaves in cotton towels after removing from oven.

Let bread cool before cutting.

"Dr. Gerson allowed patients to use 1/3 wheat to 2/3 rye flour. The bread is delicious with or
without wheat.

Sourdough Squash Rye Bread

1 cup sourdough starter, 2 cups pureed cooked squash (such as butternut or
kabocha), 11/3 cups water, 2cups rye flour, %4 cup honey, and %4 cup potato
flour.
366 THE GERSON THERAPY

Mix dry ingredients in ceramic or plastic bowl

Cover and let stand in warm place to rise (85 to 95 percent is ideal.) Add 2 cups
rye flour, then 144 to 3 cups more rye flour until achieving workable dough.
Turn onto floured board and knead for 5-10 minutes.

Let dough rest for 5 minutes, then shape into loaves or rolls.

Sprinkle bottom of baking pans with raw oats, then let rise for 2 hours or until
doubled in size.

Bake at 350°F for an hour.

Let loaves cool before slicing.

Carrot Raisin Quick Bread™

14 cups triticale or rye flour, 142 cups brown rice or oat flour, 1 cup whole
wheat or rye flour, 5 cups carrots grated, 24 cups orange pulp, 1&-% cup
honey, 2 cups raisins, 4 tsp each of allspice and coriander, plus approx. 2 large
navel oranges, peeled and ground.

Sift dry ingredients together.

Stir in raisins.

Mix the remaining ingredients, then gradually stir into dry mix.

Dough should be rather firm.

Divide in half and fill two nonstick bake pans.

Bake at 325°F for 50 minutes or until toothpick comes out clean.

Let cool before removing from pan.

Essene Bread™

This naturally sweet cakey bread is made with only sprouted grain.

The original Essene Bread recipe comes from The Essene Gospel of Peace, a 2,000-
year-old Aramaic text, which reveals the process of sprouting wheat as follows:
‘“Moisten your wheat, that the angel of water may enter it. Then set it in the air,
that the angel of air may also embrace it. And leave it from morning to evening
beneath the sun, that the angel of sunshine may descend upon it.” This modern
version differs from the original only in the use of oven heat instead of the
sun's.

For 1 loaf use: 1 quart of 2-day-old wheat, rye, or triticale sprouts.

Refrigerate sprouts for 1 day, uncovered, to dry slightly.

Do not rinse before grinding or you will wind up with more of a pudding than
bread.

Grind in hand or electric grinder or in the Norwalk® using the #2 grid (second
to the largest).

Feed sprouts gradually or they will become like cement in your grinding
mechanism.

Shape into 144" to 2" high loaf.

Place on nonstick or regular baking sheet well coated with oat flakes to prevent
sticking.

Bake at 250-300°F for 144 to 2% hours (loaf should be nicely browned). Cool
Recipes 367

thoroughly before slicing (chilled is best). Use serrated knife with a gently
sawing motion. It also helps to dip knife in cold water before slicing bread.

VARIATIONS IN BREAD

Fruit Bread

Add: 1/3 or 2/3 cup raisins or other chopped dried fruit, ‘4 tsp coriander, and
mace or allspice.

Onion or Garlic Herb Bread

Add: 2 or3 tbsp finely minced onion, or 2-4 cloves pressed garlic, ‘4 to 1 tsp dill,
thyme, and caraway or fennel.

Wafers or Crackers

Form into ‘4 ‘patties or roll out on floured board and cut into squares. Bake
wafers or crackers on a nonstick or oat-coated baking sheet at a temperature of
250-300° F for 45 minutes to 1 hour.

APPENDIXES
GERSON THERAPY
FINANCIAL AND CONTACT
INFORMATION

Yu may have wondered: How much does the Gerson Therapy cost, and
how long does the treatment last?

At the present time, the cost at a Gerson cancer facility is U.S. $ 5,500 per
patient per week. This price includes room and board for a companion to assist
in learning the treatment to help the patient on his return home to self-
administer the nutritional/detoxifying program Bringing a caregiver is
necessary. A companion shares the patient's room (twin beds are provided in
each room) and meals are included. The patient's cost includes all physicians’
fees, nursing care, all medications, coffee for enemas, teas, weekly blood and
urinalysis tests, hyperthermia treatments, laetrile, all meals, and thirteen
glasses daily of the approved juices, prepared from fresh, organically grown
produce. Also included are lectures, several Gerson books and teaching
videotapes, and a counseling session each week with a nutritionist.
Extraordinary items are charged separately, such as surgery, permanent need
for oxygen, blood transfusions, and any diagnostic and treatment procedures
performed at a different location.

Some of the additional cost incurred happens after the patient returns home.
For instance, it costs approximately $1,400 for going-home medicine for a three
month supply. Also, the Gerson Therapy requires thirteen glasses of juice a day
and much other produce for soups, vegetables, fruit plates, and so on.
Remember that in this particular natural and nontoxic treatment, food is
medicine. These nutritional items cost more than ordinary foods, depending
also on the patient's location. Costs are lower on the West Coast, but higher in
the Northeast, Midwest, and other places where organic foods must be shipped
in quickly to maintain freshness.

Seriously ill patients usually spend a minimum of three weeks at the Gerson

hospital before returning home. If a patient is not in an advanced pathological
376 Appendixes

condition, two weeks at the hospital may be satisfactory and sufficient. Still, in
order to fully restore the body, the patient must continue the strict therapy for
a suggested minimum of two years. The treatment may need to be extended if
the patient has received chemotherapy treatments, has extensive bone
metastases (which heal more slowly), or is suffering from a disease that
responds slowly, such as multiple sclerosis. The time required for total
healing, therefore, varies according to the degree of disease, the patient's age,
how faithfully the healing program is followed, and other variables.

Patients not suffering from cancer may heal more easily. On the other hand,
patients with kidney damage may need to stay “very close to the therapy’ for
the rest of their lives.

Many private health insurance companies do cover costs for the Gerson
Therapy, but health maintenance organizations (HMOs); in- house insurance
plans such as the one at Kaiser; and Medicare, CHAM- PUS, and other
government insurance programs mostly do not provide reimbursements.

To inquire about enrollment as a patient at a medical facility licensed by the
Gerson Institute, or to acquire information about any of the other programs
offered below, contact the nonprofit Gerson Institute (a.k.a. the Cancer Curing
Society) at:

THE GERSON INSTITUTE

1572 Third Avenue, San Diego, CA 92101
Tel. (619) 685-5353

Tel. toll free (888) 4-GERSON

Fax (619) 685-5363

Email: info@Gerson org
Here are some additional programs offered by the Gerson Institute:

* Referral to a trained Gerson practitioner

* Practitioner training courses

* Caregivers’ training weekends

* Gerson support groups

* Recovered Gerson patient referral list

* Recovered Gerson patient support network

* Outreach program for schools and businesses
* Membership

* Calendar of events

¢ National and international seminars
Appendixes 377

¢ Library donation program

* Subscription to the bimonthly Gerson Healing Newsletter

¢ Free literature about additional aspects of the Gerson program

¢ Purchases from a selection of Gerson Institute videotapes, audiotapes,
and book titles in addition to the current one

* Gerson Therapy Products Resource List

* Mind/Body/Spirit Resource Guide

¢ At home Gerson Therapy follow up program packet

The Gerson Institute does not own, operate, or control any treatment facility.
Instead, it maintains a licensing program with hospitals or climcs to ensure that
patients are recetving true, 100 percent Gerson-recommended care. Be sure that the
clinic or hospital chosen for therapy is Gerson Institute Approved. Readers are invited
to call the Institute for discussions about how the Gerson Therapy may help you or
your loved one.
GERSON THERAPY
DIETARY PREPARATION
SUMMARIZED

he Gerson Therapy is a totally integrated system of nutrition and

detoxification to help the body restore all the essential organs and de-
fenses. Therefore, it has many facets and complex directions to cover all areas
including food preparation.

Always keep in mind that the basic problem of all chronic disease is twofold:
toxicity and deficiency. It is essential to address and reverse both of these. Our
modern agriculture and food-processing systems contribute toxins to the food
supply in many ways: pesticides and fungicides, preservatives, dyes, coloring,
and emulsifying materials. But there are other ways the body is poisoned too:
alcohol; nicotine; prescription, over-the-counter, and street drugs; toxins in the
air, water, and soil; and in day-to-day work and home environments. There are
also industrial chemicals in paints, textile chemicals, glues, polishes, benzene
fractions, and so on. In order to heal and detoxify the body, all these have to be
eliminated.

It also stands to reason that in the Gerson diet all foods should be or-
ganically (or biochemically) grown on soil fertilized by natural composted
materials—free of pesticides, herbicides, and so on and rich in the best
nutrients. All foods must be freshly prepared, unsalted, and fat-free. Aluminum
and Teflon-coated cooking utensils must be avoided. Stainless steel, enamel,
ironware, and glass containers may be used in cooking. Microwave ovens
change the foods so that they are poorly assimilated, besides emitting radiation
into the kitchen and “cooking the cook.” Avoid cooking in microwaves and
never heat water in them Some crockpots may be safe; some have been found
Appendixes 879

to contain toxins in their glaze.

Dr. Gerson found that juicers that work on a centrifugal system do not
extract minerals efficiently. Besides, they tend to kill enzymes. He insisted that
the best juices with the highest mineral content can be made using a two-
process juice-extracting system: first grind the materials to be pressed in an
electric food triturator; mix them well in a bowl; then place the ground, mixed
material in a strong cloth and put it under pressure in a press. This juice is rich
and homogeneous (does not easily separate), and the process helps to extract
the largest amount of juice and minerals—up to 50 percent more than a
centrifugal juicer!

FOOD PREPARATION

Necessary Foods
Fruit
Juices of fruit, vegetables, and leaves
Vegetables, salads
Special soup
Potatoes
Oatmeal, salt-free rye bread

Dr. Gerson added that the above foods are easily and quickly digested; the
body needs larger portions and more frequent servings. The patient is to eat as
mutch as possible, even during the night when awake. As the body rebuilds,
some patients are ravenously hungry and food should be available at the
bedside: a fresh fruit plate, some fruit salad, applesauce, and so on. Since
patients are not supposed to drink water, peppermint tea should be placed at
the bedside. If the patient awakens during the night and is thirsty, some warm
tea should be available as well as food.

Forbidden Foods

All manufactured (processed) foods—bottled, canned, frozen, preserved,
refined, salted, smoked, and sulfured items—must be avoided They are
harmful.
380 Appendixes

Alcohol Cream Pineapples

Avocados Cucumbers Spices (pepper, paprika)
Berries Epsom salts Soybeans and products
Bicarbonate of soda in Flour (wheat) Meat Milk

toothpaste and gargle Fish Tea (black)

Butter Eggs Drinking water

Cheese Ice cream Fats

Candy Mushrooms Nuts

Cake Coffee (including

Sugar (white) decaffeinated)

Commercial beverages Oils

Other Absolutely Forbidden Items

Fluorides in water, toothpaste, gargle Hair
dyes, permanents
Cosmetics: underarm deodorants, lipstick, lotions

JUICE PREPARATION

Citrus Juices

Use only a reamer-type juicer—do not use a juicer into which a half orange or
lemon is inserted with the skin. Pressing the skin of citrus extracts harmful fatty
and aromatic acids into the juice.

Apple and Carrot Juice

Use apples and carrots in approximately equal proportions. Wash apples; do not
peel. Cut and remove core. Wash carrots; use a brush but do not peel or scrape.
Grind apples and carrots into a bow]; mix thoroughly, place in juicer cloth, and
press.

Apple/carrot juice may be kept for 2-3 hours in a thermos if patient goes back to
work.
Appendixes 381

Green Leaf Juice
Obtain as many of the items mentioned below as possible. During certain
seasons, only two or three may be available. Do not substitute items not on the
green leaf juice materials list.

Escarole Lettuce Watercress

Endive Red lettuce Swiss chard

Romaine Beet tops (young Red cabbage (2-3 leaves) Green
pepper inner leaves)

Add 1 medium apple per glass when grinding. Grind, press, drink im-
mediately. Wash all juice cloths regularly. If pores are clogged and pressing is
difficult, discard and use a new cloth.

PREPARATION OF VEGETABLES

Use all vegetables except mushrooms, mustard greens, and carrot greens.
Vegetables should be cooked with a minimum of water or soup stock (perhaps 2
to 3 tablespoonfuls) slowly on low heat until well done. To prevent burning, place
on metal mat, and place cut tomatoes and/or onions at the bottom of the pot.
These generate juice and make the food tasty. You can also use celery. Certain
vegetables (squashes) contain a lot of water and need no additional water.
Spinach releases much water in cooking—discard this water. It is bitter and
should not be used. Certain other vegetables (beets, corn) cannot be cooked
without water. Beets should be cooked in theirjackets and peeled when done.

SPICES

Since spices, like other aromatic items (such as pineapples and berries) can
interfere with the healing reaction, Dr. Gerson allowed only certain relatively
mild spices and warned patients to use very small quantities. Use only those spices
on the list below; 10 others.

Allspice, anise, bay leaves, coriander, dill, fennel, mace, marjoram, rosemary,
sage, saffron, tarragon, thyme, sorrel, and summer savory.

Chives, onions, garlic, and parsley can be used in larger amounts.
It's imperative for the patient to eat as much as possible of raw vegetables in
the form of salads. These items can be finely grated, chopped, or minced, mixed
or eaten separately. Here are the vegetables:
382 Appendixes

Apples and carrots Watercress Green onions —_ Knob celery
All lettuce greens Cauliflower — Endives Chives
Chicory Radishes Green peppers ‘Tomatoes

Salad Dressing: Dilute organic red wine or apple cider vinegar with water to
taste. Add a little spray-dried organic cane juice (Sucanat), some herbs, onion, or
garlic.

Special Soup

This special (Hippocrates) soup is extremely important, and Dr. Gerson
ordered his patients to have it at both lunch and dinner. Since much of the
Gerson Therapy is directed toward cleansing the liver, this soup is specially
designed (and Hippocrates did acknowledge its effectiveness) to help cleanse the
kidneys. After patients become used to eating without salt (usually in one to two
weeks after starting the Gerson Therapy), the special soup is tasty and a delicious
start for every meal.

The following vegetables should be used, thoroughly washed, not peeled, cut
into cubes, covered with water, and cooked for 1 4 to 2 hours. Put through a
food mill and allow only fibers and peels to remain. (This should form a thick,
creamy soup, not a clear broth!) Allow soup to cool before storing in refrigerator.
Make only enough for about two days. The ingredients include:

1 medium celery knob (root), 2 medium onions (if not in season, substitute a
little parsley only and 3-4 stalks of branch celery), 114 lbs tomatoes, 1 Ib potatoes,
1 medium parsley root (rarely ever available; if not, omit but more if desired
during the summer season), 2 small leeks (if not available, substitute 2 medium
onions), several cloves of garlic.

Until patients are used to salt-free eating, raw garlic should always be offered
with a garlic press to add a “kick” to soup, vegetables, salad, and so on.

POTATOES

Baked potatoes are the most valuable. Potatoes should be used at lunch and
dinner and should only rarely be replaced by organic brown or wild rice. Pasta
should be avoided because it is made from processed flour that has no nutritional
value. Potatoes can be baked, boiled in their jackets, mashed with a little soup,
peeled after being boiled in their jackets, or cut up and mixed with salad dressing
into a potato salad. Potatoes can also be baked in a casserole with onion,
tomatoes, celery, and so on. After 6-10 weeks, if nonfat yogurt is permitted, add
onions, chives, or garlic to the yogurt for a great dressing for your baked potato.
Appendixes 383

Sweet potatoes may be used once a week.

OATMEAL

A large portion of oatmeal should be eaten for breakfast, made from organic
rolled oats, 1/2 cup of oats to 1 cup (or a little more) of water. Cook slowly until
done. Other cereals should not be used; the oats have a special purpose: they
provide good B vitamins; they are rich in proteins but have a special property:
they provide the patient's intestinal tract with a soft cushion (rather than harsh
and grainy cereals) for all the juices to come. You can vary the flavor by adding
different fruit: raw grated apples, papaya or other fruit; honey or 100 percent pure
maple syrup; unsulfured blackstrap molasses; stewed prunes or other dried fruit,
fresh raw or stewed apricots, apples with raisins, peaches, bananas, and so on.

BREAD

You may use some salt-free and fat-free rye bread only after consuming the full
meal (rye is more nourishing and easier to digest than wheat, which is low in
nutrients and often causes allergic reactions). Remember that bread should not be
the main part of any meal. When bread is dry, it can be grated and used in recipes
requiring bread crumbs. Occasionally you may also use potato flour, tapioca, and
cornstarch.

SUGAR AND SWEETENERS

Use organic brown sugar, maple syrup, organic light honey, or unsulfured
molasses up to 2 teaspoons a day (provided there is no hypoglycemia or
diabetes).

PEPPERMINT AND OTHER HERB TEAS

Peppermint tea relieves nausea, flatulence, and upset stomachs (during healing
flare-ups) and helps digestion. Other herb teas (linden blossom, tahebo, licorice
root, essiac, etc.) are all permitted and can often be useful in overcoming
problems. Herb teas such as chamomile and valerian are soothing and can help
induce restful sleep. Since the patient should not drink water, a thermos bottle of
peppermint or other herb tea should be provided at bedside in case the patient
awakens at night and is thirsty.
384 Appendixes

SAMPLE MENU

Breakfast

1 glass (8 oz) of orange juice Large portion oatmeal with choice of fruit sauce
Organic 100 percent rye bread, unsalted and fat-free, toasted and spread with
honey if desired

Lunch

Plate of salad

1 glass (8 oz)of warm special soup 1

glass apple/carrot juice

Baked potato or other (boiled in jacket, potato salad, casserole, etc.) with yogurt
dressing, when permitted Freshly cooked vegetables Dessert: raw or stewed
fruit

Dinner

Same as lunch. Vary meals by using different vegetables, different methods
of preparing potatoes, other kinds of salads.

Organic brown rice may be used once a week.

Organic sweet potatoes may be used once a week in the place of potatoes.
GERSON THERAPY
SUPPLY
RESOURCES

he Gerson Institute endeavors to provide Gerson Therapy resources and

referrals that are useful and well researched. All information provided at the
time of printing is accurate. The Gerson Institute does not own or operate any of
the clinics or related businesses listed and cannot claim responsibility for the
services they provide, their products or their business practices. Please let the
Gerson Institute know if you encounter any difficulties.

When making your Gerson Therapy choices please ensure that any individual,
clinic, support group or business offering the Gerson Therapy or claiming to be
associated with the Gerson Institute is in possession of a current “Gerson Institute
Seal of Approval.” Please contact the Gerson Institute for more information.

For a possible discount from any of these resources, mention that you are a
Gerson Therapy patient who learned of the resource from this book.

RECOMMENDED JUICERS

Specific requirements for the proper juicer were devised by Dr. Max Gerson.
He discovered that centrifugal juicers were unacceptable and that a separate
grinder and press provide the best juice extraction. Consequently the following
are superior:

The most popular juicing device among Gerson patients is the Norwalk®
Model 270 Ultimate Juicer manufactured by Norwalk Sales & Service, RO. Box
829, or 808 South Bloomington, Lowell, Arkansas 72745.

Please be aware that to order, you will be referred by Norwalk Sales & Service
to the Norwalk® juicer’s worldwide distributor, Richard Boger; therefore, it’s
best to contact this accommodating person directly at:
NUTRITION REPORT: THE
CHINA STUDY

Ac exciting book came out in January 2005, titled The China Study: Startling

Implications for Diet, Weight Loss and Long-term Health, by T. Colin
Campbell, Ph.D., with Thomas M. Cambell II (BenBella Books, Dallas, TX
75206). Dr. Campbell’s many years of in-depth research prove many of Dr.
Gerson’s ideas.

Dr. Campbell, a Professor of Nutrition at Cornell University, states that his
thinking was originally very much “establishment.” However, over thirty years
of in-depth nutrition studies have changed his ideas. When we first heard him
speak some six years ago, we were so impressed that we wrote up the content
of the tapes we had made of his lectures. We subsequently published an extract
in our Newsletters Vol. 17, #3 May/June 2000 and Vol. 17, #4 July/ August
2000. Reproduced below is a paragraph from one of those articles on the subject
of animal proteins in relation to cancer. Our article is taken from Dr.
Campbell's new book on the subject of sugar.

“Dr. Campbell and his team were sent to study nutrition in the
Philippines: the idea was to develop a way of self-help for the starving
children, and it was assumed they needed protein. They were supposed to
find a good source. Then some surprising facts came up: the advisors were
told that kids who consumed the most proteins got the most liver cancer.
Other studies, some done by physicians in India, also showed in rats that 30
experimental animals fed a 20 percent protein diet all developed liver
cancer. Those that were fed a 5 percent protein diet got none. It seemed
unbelievable. Further, liver tumors grew faster in those animals that re-
ceived a 20 percent protein diet. When switched to a 5 percent protein
diet, the tumors in the sick animals shrank. It became very clear: appro-
priate nutrients control growth. Less protein leads to less cancer.”

With Dr. Campbell's permission, we quote freely here from his new book:
“The recommendation on added sugar is as outrageous as the one for
protein. [When] this FNB (Food and Nutrition Board) report was being
released, an expert panel put together by the WHO (World Health
Organization) and the FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) was
completing a new report on diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic
diseases. Professor Phillip James was a member of this panel and a panel
spokesperson on the added sugar recommendation. Early rumors of the
report's findings indicated that the WHO/FAO was on the verge of rec-
ommending an upper safe limit of 10 percent for added sugar, far lower
than the 25 percent established by the American FNB group.

“Politics, however, had entered the discussion early, as it had done in
earlier reports on added sugars. According to a news release from the
Director-General’s office at the WHO, the U.S.-based Sugar Association and
the World Sugar Research Organization, who ‘represent the interests of
sugar growers and refiners, had mounted a strong lobbying campaign in an
attempt to discredit the WHO report and suppress its release ...’ According
to the Guardian newspaper in London, the U.S. sugar industry was
threatening to ‘bring the World Health organization to its knees’ unless it
abandoned these guidelines on added sugar. WHO people were describing
the threat as ‘tantamount to blackmail.’ The U.S.-based group even publicly
threatened to lobby the U.S. Congress to reduce the $406 milllion US.
funding of the WHO if it persisted in keeping the upper limit so low at 10
percent. There were reports . .. that the Bush Administration was inclined to
side with the sugar industry.”

Dr. Campbell concluded: “So, for added sugars, we now have two different
upper ‘safe’ limits: a 10 percent limit for the international community and a 25
percent limit for the U.S.” (!!)

This recalls the horrific scandal involving the drug VIOXX, which was
withdrawn from the marketplace after it was found to have caused some 50,000
deaths, then was subsequently reestablished as a pernutted drug by the FDA
(Food and Drug Administration). As we can now see, that is obviously not the
only instance of huge industry interests threatening the public’s health.
THE ANTI-CANCER
INGREDIENTS IN THE
GERSON THERAPY

Iz 1994, Dr. Michael Gearin-Tosh, a professor of English literature and an

Oxford University don, was diagnosed with multiple myeloma (bone
marrow cancer) and was offered chemotherapy to extend his life expectancy to
possibly one to two years. Without it, he was told, he might not survive six
months.

Professor Gearin-Tosh decided to investigate alternatives. In time, his
research led him to the Gerson Therapy. In 2002, his delightful book, Living
Proof. A Medical Mutiny, was published by Scribner in Great Britain. It not only
details his search and his adventures while recovering, but at the end there is a
most interesting research report by Dr. Carmen Wheatley, of “Orthomolecular
Oncology,” also reviewed by Dr. Peter Gravett, Professor Ray Powles, and Dr.
Robert Kyle, all connected with prestigious oncology clinics (Living Proof). Dr.
Wheatley, a good friend of Prof. Gearin-Tosh, was most interested in his illness,
research and subsequent recovery.

We are interested here in Dr. Wheatley’s report. She studied the Gerson
Therapy intensively in connection with her work, specifically its “anti-cancer”
ingredients. She expressed amazement about Dr. Gerson’s selection of specific
foods that are now proven to be cancer fighters. At the time of Dr. Gerson’s
work, the cancer-fighting benefits of these ingredients were not known, so Dr.
Wheatley came to the conclusion that Dr. Gerson worked with a great deal of
intuition. He was also a thorough observer and insisted that “the results at the
sickbed are conclusive.”
Appendixes
We quote from Dr. Wheatley’s notes:

“The Gerson diet highlights a number of foods in which modern research
has identified some key cancer-fighting components, ie., flaxseed oil
containing Omega-3, which oppose the bad eicosanoids (fats) and appear to
interfere with metastasis and promote apoptosis (the breakdown of tumor
cells) and Omega-6, promoting Tumor Necrosis Factor.”

Dr. Wheatley further details some specific foods, for instance apples, which
are rich in quercetin. This substance, according to Dr. Patrick Quillin of Cancer
Treatment Centers of America, has the potential to revert a cancerous cell back
to a normal healthy cell and is also capable of producing apoptosis. Quercetin
also interferes with metastasis. Apples, Dr. Wheatley continues, “are just one
component of Gerson’s fruit list. The vegetables, particularly of the cruciferous
family, can modify carcinogen activation. Garlic is a natural detoxifier, while
onions, leeks, scallions and chives are all good sources of the allium family,
which has been demonstrated to enhance DNA repair mechanisms” (pp. 278-
279). Dr. Wheatley wonders how Gerson, “without this scientific knowledge,
empirically devised a method which ensured that a large range of these
compounds would be delivered to the cancer patient intact and in
pharmacologically active doses” (p. 280). There are many more examples given but
it would lead too far to quote them all.
HOUSEHOLD CHEMICALS:
ANOTHER SOURCE OF
TOXICITY

W: are always very anxious to keep a clean house. Probably, this feeling gets

even more intense when there is a seriously ill person in the home. As a
result, the householder does a lot of cleaning, using all kinds of advertised
chemicals. Actually, that is a very bad idea! It would be a far better idea to
consider a “clean” house one that contains no toxic chenucals. Use simple soaps,
for instance.

The problem is that most cleaning chemicals are quite toxic, some more than
others. An immediate offender is the spray can, especially the aerosols. Spray
bottles aren't safe, either: for example, once you spray a window cleanser, there
are droplets in the air that one inhales. If the patient is in the area, those
droplets can go into his bloodstream! Cleansers containing chlorine are also a
bad idea. Furniture polishes containing solvents, coloring, waxes, etc., are toxic.
Paints, including art materials, are very toxic — the list is virtually unending!

The worst things to use, of course, are pesticides, including sprays to kill
cockroaches, mosquitoes and flies. These not only kill insects, they are clearly
toxic to humans as well. So, what to do?

Avoid all aerosols, since they contain fluorocarbons, which are highly toxic
to humans as well as damaging to the ozone layer in the atmosphere.

There are many soaps and even cleansers that do not contain chlorine or
other harmful additives. Instead of using pesticides to kill roaches, sprinkle
boric acid powder where they are seen. They may not die immediately —it may
take several days — but they can be controlled without
397 Appendixes

harm to the patient. If you have flies in the house, even old-fashioned sticky
flypaper is quite safe and effective. To control mosquitoes, you'll need
screening. Don't put any advertised chemicals on your skin! And if you clean
windows, simply pour some liquid on a cloth— don’t spray.

There can also be trouble from the outside: your next-door neighbors may
use pesticides in their gardens and the wind can blow theses toxic chemicals
your way. Stay indoors for a day or so while they are doing this and use a room
ozone generator or air purifier. Also, while a patient is using the Gerson
Therapy, do not paint the inside of the house! The out- gassing solvents are very
toxic. Also avoid acrylic materials. Examine any and all chemicals and cleansers

regarding their content and be careful.

COSMETICS: ANOTHER
SOURCE OF TOXICITY
398 Appendixes

A s we have seen, it is imperative to eliminate all new sources of toxicity.

Since the body becomes toxic from being exposed to so many toxins in the
environment—in the soil, air, water, food, not to mention from smokers and
other sources—and since the Gerson Therapy is greatly concerned with
removing these toxins, it is obvious that all new sources of toxicity have to be
eliminated.

One such source is cosmetics. All substances sprayed or rubbed on the skin
travel promptly into the bloodstream. Orthodox medicine utilizes this fact with
the application of “patches” in order to deliver substances (mostly painkillers)
into the bloodstream. It doesn’t occur to most people that powders, creams,
ointments, sprays, etc., are also delivered into the bloodstream! For that reason,
we simply tell our female patients that “if you wouldn't eat or drink it, don’t
put it on your skin (or lips).” We are willing to make one tiny concession: it is
permissible to use an eyebrow pencil.

One of the most offensive cosmetics is the underarm deodorant. Many of the
brands offered contain mercury, which, is severely toxic. But what of those
creams or sticks that are sold as “organic”? They are still not acceptable because
they interfere with the body’s attempt to eliminate poisons by the simple act of
perspiration. Many patients experience “night sweats,” an attempt by the body
to “detoxify” when at rest. Others experience severe sweats during the healing
reactions. These eliminations are also embarrassingly “smelly,” and the patients
first try to clear this “problen’’ with baths or showers. But that often isn’t
sufficient—the offensive odor returns! So, of course, they reach for the
deodorant cream or spray or stick. That is a serious mistake! When the body
attempts to detoxify, one must absolutely not interfere by stopping or blocking
this perspiration! Blocking the underarm passages will return the toxic
materials into the lymphatic system around the chest and shoulders, and
increase the chance for breast cancer—even in men! Male breast cancer is
increasing and we have to assume that much of the problem can be related to
the use of underarm deodorants.

“So what can I do to overcome the problem?” If baths and showers are
inadequate, here is the answer: “Don't eat or drink materials that are toxic (not
organic), and detoxify the much more efficient way with coffee enemas!”

We are not only addressing women on the subject of cosmetics, but men!
Another toxic item that is used by both women and men is hair dye, which is
very easily assimilated through the scalp into the bloodstream. This is because
the scalp is thoroughly “vasculated;’ that is, many blood vessels close to the
surface can absorb poisons. Gerson patients must avoid dyes, permanents, and
any substances used on the hair other than the mildest of shampoos. Gerson
patients should also avoid perfumes (which contain aromatics), and men
should avoid aftershave lotions and aerosol shaving creams (see the previous
section on household chemicals).

WHY ARE CHILDREN ON
ANTIDEPRESSANTS?

hile I was recently on a lecture tour in England, on September 20, 2003, a

large headline appeared in the Guardian: “50,000 Children Taking
Antidepressants.” A sub-headline read: “Drug withdrawn over fears it made
youngsters want to kill themselves.”

This was a double shocker! Come to think of it, why are such a huge number
of children “depressed”? A number of decades ago, this problem was virtually
nonexistent! Why should children now be depressed? They should be living the
happiest, most carefree time of their lives. In the UK, as well as in the United
States, few children are hungry or homeless. Besides, poor children are not the
ones who are medicated with antidepressants. Their parents cannot afford
them.

This brings to mind a study that was done in 1994 at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and was described in Gerson Healing Newsletter, Volume
9, #3, Sept./Oct. 1994. The researchers reported at the time that children who
ate more than 12 hot dogs a month developed childhood leukemia more than
nine times as often as normally expected. Also, children born to mothers who
ate at least one hot dog a week during pregnancy had double the normal risk of
developing brain tumors.

Clinical depression is presently described in Current Medical Diagnosis and
Treatment (Krupp & Chatton) as having the following symptoms:

* lowered mood, sadness to intense feelings of guilt and hopelessness,

f\ppviiuixes

¢ difficulty in thinking, inability to concentrate, inability to make
decisions,

* loss of interest, less involvement with work and recreation,

* headache, disrupted sleep, change in appetite,

* anxiety,

¢ suicidal tendencies.

It would follow that present-day food—loaded with pesticides and
fungicides, as well as food additives, sugars, dyes, emulsifiers, and preserv-
atives, foods that are depleted in and lacking nutrients — would have to be the
culprit. Children are simply suffering from severe deficiencies and toxicity. The
brain, this incredibly delicate organ, responds to the burden by decreased
function.

Sarah Bosely, health editor, the author of the article in the Guardian, reports
further that one major antidepressant is being given to some 3,000 children even.
though doctors are told that it should not be given to anyone under 18 years of age.

Another drug, Seroxat, distributed by GlaxoSmithKline (drugs have
different names in different countries) was also banned for anybody under 18
years of age. This drug was shown to be able to cause children to have suicidal
thoughts or to become “hostile” —this word is used in clinical trials instead of
“homicidal”.

There is worse news. The article continues: “Data which suggests these
drugs could be causing children to feel murderous and suicidal has been in
drug company hands for several years.”

The drug described, Seroxat, belongs to a group known as “selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors” or SSRIs, of which the one best known in the
US. is Prozac. It is not licensed for children.

These drugs also admittedly cause “emotional liability’ — this term is used
to describe potentially suicidal behavior as well as self-harm.

At the end of a lengthy report is the story of a young lady, Holly Workman,
who was first medicated at age 14. She had previously felt “low,” but had
never felt like killing herself. After a few weeks on the drug, she began cutting
her arms with knives and other sharp instruments, and her family had to hide
all such items from her. She tried several times to commit suicide, even though
“she hardly knew the person who was doing these things.” When she stopped.
taking the drug, she felt better, but her G.R (General Practitioner) felt she
needed to continue it and persuaded her to go back on it! She eventually found
out for herself that her nightmares stopped when she was off the drug for
good.

IMMUNIZATION
VACCINATION

D ue to the current “flu epidemic,” there is a great deal of interest in

immunization and vaccination. Checking into my files, I find innu-
merable books and articles written on the subject. The list is much too long to
include here.

But let’s look at the story. It started with Edward Jenner, M_D. (1749- 1823), a
British physician. He observed that milkmaids who frequently contracted cases
of cow pox had a mild outbreak of the pox and were subsequently immune to
smallpox. This led him to assume that a mild form of a disease produces
immunity to a more deadly form. It was a correct assumption; however, in
future attempts to repeat the results, it was never taken into consideration that
the immune milkmaids were young and presumably healthy! Thus, their
immune systems were able to respond!

Since then, generations of youngsters have been vaccinated against
smallpox and by the 1980s, the medical authorities declared that smallpox was
no more!

Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) used the idea of weakening bacteria and germs to
clear them and produce “clean” products. Hence, the pasteurization of milk
that is now almost universal in the “developed” world. Still, on his deathbed,
he is quoted to have stated, “The germ is nothing, the terrain is everything,”
meaning that the person’s immune system makes the difference in whether he
or she develops the disease or not. This statement is not widely known. For
one, pasteurization is a huge business and the milk industry would oppose any
change. Also, vaccination
403 Appendixes

has developed into an important industry and is certain to continue to find
support in government and medical circles. It has also not been publicized that
“pasteurized” milk is heat damaged, causing the protein content to be poorly
assimilated. This has been demonstrated by Dr. Francis M. Pottinger, M.D., in
his Cat book. (See the article on “Milk —the White Poison’ in the Gerson Healing
Newsletter, Vol. 19, #1, Jan./Feb.

2004.)

But there is more —much more! Babies are no longer just vaccinated against
smallpox: for years, they have been receiving the DPT (Diptheria- Pertussis-
Tetanus) injections at a younger and younger age. Dr. Robert Mendelsohn,
head of the Pediatric Society of the U.S., and head of the Chicago Pediatric
Hospital, wrote extensively about his research into that problem He never
stopped warning against immunization of babies in his lectures and articles in
medical journals. He pointed to the many children who were permanently
injured by disease, including extensive brain damage. Eventually, he was able
to demonstrate that some 85% of SIDS (Sudden Infant Death Syndrome)
occurred within 48 hours after injection of DPT, while the rest of the deaths
occurred within two weeks after the immunization! Nobody listened; however,
eventually, the U.S. government had to guarantee the safety of DPT injections
since the pharmaceutical companies that were producing them had so many
lawsuits on their hands for damage and death caused by the shots. This means
that our tax money supports the problem.

The DPT shots are still being administered in the U.S. Their use is actually
unscientific, since a new baby does not yet have his or her own immune system
and is therefore unable to respond by producing immunity to diseases! A baby
is born with about six months’ worth of the mother’s immunity. Yet,
pediatricians continue to start immunization with DPT in babies at two to three
months of age!

In Japan, it turns out, the doctors have become aware of the reason for the
problem with immunizing babies too early and, we are told, they are now
forbidden to give vaccination shots to babies before the age of two years. As a
result, there is no more SIDS in Japan.

New and even worse vaccinations have been introduced and schools force
Kids to be vaccinated or not admitted! These are the vaccines supposedly
guarding against hepatitis C. They reportedly contain a mercury compound
that is extremely toxic to brain tissue and they have produced a large number
of brain-damaged children.

In the United States., former President Ford, shortly after he was nominated
by outgoing President Nixon, wanted to “do something for the
Appendixes 404

American public.” It was the time when the flu season was about to start and
the virus that was identified at that time was the “swine flu’ virus. President
Ford ordered a large number of immunizing shots against the swine flu to be
made available, particularly to “individuals at risk’—the elderly, young
people, and people suffering from chronic diseases. The result of this well-
meaning activity was a disaster: a number of people died and many became
paralyzed due to the swine flue shots!

We come to the true problem of immunization: people whose immune
systems are weakened due to age or disease, particularly due to chemotherapy,
or people who have to be medicated with immune suppressants due to organ
transplants—those people are unable to respond to immunization and are
severely damaged if not killed by their use.

Another problem is the use of vaccines against tumors in cancer patients.
One first has to understand that a cancer patient has a weakened immune
system—or else he would have no malignancy! A functioning immune
response kills developing malignant cells without the host being aware of any
activity. So we have to assume that this type of patient is hardly able to
respond to immunization. The John Wayne Cancer Center in California has
experimented with immunization against cancer for some time, rather
ineffectively. However, Dr. Gerson is regularly being misquoted as having
supported immunization against cancer. In his book A Cancer Therapy — Results
of 50 Cases, Dr. Gerson discusses the introduction of cancer cells into patients
suffering from malignancies. He admits that a very few dramatic results (not
long lasting) were obtained; however, most experiments, including those of the
famous Dr. William B. Coley, remained “quite uncertain and sparing’ (page
128).

In a reported experiment, one man with advanced colon cancer was given
immunization injections of the vaccine every six weeks. Within 12 weeks, the
tumor had disappeared. However, “He was part of a national trial being
conducted at USC/Norris in L.A. Federal rules require that patients
participating in research studies receive “proven” treatments before they
receive experimental therapies. Because this means the body has already had
its immune system devastated by chemotherapy, it is amazing that they got
this kind of result.” (In even one case!) The above was taken from an article in
the L.A. Times of March 17, 2003.

It also needs to be remembered that in a cancer patient, a large number of
malignant cells are present and there is no need to introduce more. Further, in
order to get a true response, it should be the physician's duty to first of all
activate the patient's immume system by detoxifying and replenishing all the
organ systems. Once this has been achieved, there is no
further need to inject cancer cells because of the presence of tumors in the
patient! There is one other problem that Dr. Gerson discusses: it is not sufficient
to try to activate the body's defenses temporarily with immunizations. The
body needs to recover sufficiently so that its immune activity remains strong
and permanent. Then, long recovery without recurrence can be achieved.

The current flu “epidemic” started much earlier than usual and was already
well underway in early to mid-December. The flu season is generally expected
to become quite virulent by February/March. What is particularly disturbing
are the reports of children dying of the flu! And here, 1 suspect that a great deal
of blame goes back to the reports of children’s worsening eating habits. We
reported in our Gerson Healing Newsletter, Vol 18, #3, on the increasing
“addiction” of kids to Chicken Nuggets, and on the frightening lack of nutrition
in “fast foods.” The Wall Street journal of March 18, 2003, reported on the
problem under the heading ‘Heart Disease Hits the Preschool Set.” That article
states, “Children’s diet is becoming more and more restricted. They develop a
taste for the deep-fried salted nuggets and refuse other foods.” Is this the
ultimate destruction of their immune systems that adds to the problem of early
heart disease? It might well be.

In the meantime, a large portion of the population is suffering from the flu.
Schools are closing early because kids are sick, and teachers are affected as well.
I suspect that nutrition in general is worsening and people will be getting sicker
every year.

Again, as I have done so often, I urge our readers, family and friends, to eat
fresh, organic, body-building foods in order to remain active and healthy.
406 Appendixes

THE ROOT CANAL AND
DENTAL AMALGAM COVER-
UP OF CANCER AND OTHER

DEGENERATIVE DISEASES

T he Root Canal Coverup (ISBN 0-945196-19-9, U.S.$23) is a 1993 book written

by George E. Meinig, D.D.S., EA.C.D. It is available from him directly by
sending payment to his company, Bion Publishing, 323 East Matilijia Street,
#110-151, Ojai, California 93023. The book can also be obtained from the Gerson
Institute.

Dr. Meinig admits to having installed many root canal fillings while he
practiced dentistry and founded the Association of Root Canal Specialists,
which he chaired for many years. What the dentist learned when he eventually
studied the work of oral scientist Weston Price, D.D.S., changed his thinking
and professional life forever. Dr. Meinig discovered that patients treated with
root canal fillings suffer froma variety of serious chronic illnesses.

In order to treat the root of a tooth, or an abscess that forms at the base of
this root, a dentist must drill any loose or infected material from the canal that
houses the tooth’s nerve. Then the dentist can treat the abscess. But once a
nerve is dead and removed, this tooth also dies. Dr. Meinig’s book gives the
background of extensive and detailed research done on root canals by Weston
A. Price, D.D.S., EA.C.D.

When Dr. Meinig became aware of the dangers inherent in the accepted root
canal treatment, he renounced his position at the Association of Root Canal
Specialists. Now he spends his time and energies making the public as well as
dentists aware of the research conducted by Dr. Price.

The first indication of problems due to root canals came from one of Dr.
Price’s patients who was bedfast and virtually paralyzed due to rheumatoid
arthritis. For necessary reasons, her root-canal-filled tooth was removed
although it looked healthy and normal on X rays. Within a few weeks the
patient was up; and after some months, she could walk and her health was
totally restored—no more rheumatoid arthritis.

Curious at the patient's positive response, Dr. Price recovered that extracted
tooth from storage, sterilized it thoroughly, and implanted it under the skin of
a rabbit in an in vivo experiment. Within five days, the rabbit was victimized
by the same disease, severe rheumatoid arthritis. And in ten days it died of this
disease. Dr. Price implanted the same tooth under the skin of thirty-three
rabbits. In each case, the tooth caused arthritis to occur in the rabbit and killed
the animal.

Going even further, Dr. Price performed more experiments with trying to
clear the apparently infectious material from extracted teeth. He auto- claved
them (sterilized by steam pressure, at 250°F, or 121°C). This made no
difference. Each rabbit with the “sterilized” (autoclaved) tooth implanted still
developed the disease and died, usually within ten days. Then, as a control, Dr.
Price implanted a healthy tooth under the skin of a rabbit. The rabbit lived
without showing any signs of problems for fifteen years, its normal life span.

He published the results of this laboratory finding. Subsequently, many
other patients had root-canal-filled teeth extracted—some suffering from
kidney disease, others from cancer, heart disease, or arthritis. In virtually all
cases, the patients showed considerable improvement or even total recovery
after their offending teeth were removed. However, in each case, the rabbit
receiving the tooth died of the same disease that the patient exhibited.

To explain: When the nerve is removed from a tooth, it’s no longer living or
supplied with nutrients. It is dead. However, the normal structure of the tooth
includes tiny “canules” (similar to the capillaries in every human tissue) that
carry nutrients to the living tooth. Once the tooth is dead, nutrients stop
circulating through these canules; instead the canules become infested with
bacteria or viruses. Not only that, but the filling of the nerve canal shrinks a
tiny bit, enough for more microorganisms to lodge there too.

None of this infection shows on dental X rays. A dead tooth is thus a potent
source of bacterial and viral toxins that spread throughout the body. Many
people with a good immune system and powerful defenses can live with this
constant source of trouble without showing any symptoms. For
ASSIIVIU AVS

others —about 25 percent of all persons having root canals —chronic illness
sets in. They come down with various severe diseases or other health diffi-
culties.

Carefully taken and scrutinized, X rays eventually show “cavitation”
(hollowing out of the surrounding jawbone) around the root-canal-treated
tooth. As the resistant patient ages or is weakened by accidents, colds, flu, or
severe stress, the ability to overcome this “focal infection’ is reduced and can
cause or contribute to a chronic degenerative disease such as cancer.
Unquestionably, cancer can come from root canals in your mouth.

CANCER FROM MERCURY AMALGAM DENTAL FILLINGS

Many Gerson patients are informed about health dangers associated with
dental ‘silver’ amalgam fillings. They appear silver because the toxic metal
mercury used in them is silver in color. In fact, dental amalgams consist of
more than 51 percent mercury mixed with a small amount of silver and other
toxic metals (tin, copper, zinc, and sometimes nickel). The problem, of course, is
the mercury, a highly poisonous heavy metal with powerful adverse effects on
the nervous system Once installed in teeth, the mercury steadily leaches out
into the body and is carried throughout the system by blood circulation.

Some people are a great deal more sensitive to this circulating mercury than
others, and it's been proven to cause multiple sclerosis along with vast
numbers of other degenerative diseases in many people. Especially, dental
amalgam fillings cause cancer. This has been documented in a March 2000 book
issued by Hampton Roads Publishing Company, Inc., Elements of Danger.
Protect Yourself against the Hazards of Modern Dentistry (ISBN 1-57174-146-1),
written by Morton Walker, D.PM. To acquire a copy, send U.S.$18 to the book
distributor, Freelance Communications, 484 High Ridge Road, Stamford,
Connecticut 06905- 3020.

When dental amalgam fillings are removed, it’s been observed (as detailed
by over one thousand references in Dr. Walker’s book) that some chronically ill
dental patients tend to recover from their illnesses. While admittedly, other
people possessing amalgams in their teeth for many years do not show
apparent health problems, it’s likely that they actually are experiencing
unrecognized subclinical illnesses.

It will not come as a surprise that we who represent the Gerson Ther
410 Appendixes

apy urge debilitated patients to remove teeth with root canal fillings and
eliminate all dental amalgam fillings.

Important: Seriously ill patients should not have their mercury fillings
removed immediately. No matter how well the removal is done, some mercury
vapor is released, and temporary mercury poisoning is inevitable. This must be
avoided until the patient is strengthened, that is, after nine to twelve months
on the Gerson Therapy.

For prevention and as a means of self-treatment, it is highly advisable to
eliminate these sources of cancer and other illnesses. To do so, consult a holistic
(biological), biocompatible (mercury-free) dentist who belongs to one of the
four dental professional organizations offering names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of their members. For referrals to such a dentist in your
area, see Appendix C in Morton Walker's book Elements of Danger.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ahringsmann, H. “Historische Bemerkung zu der neuen Diatbehandlung der
Tuberkulose nach Gerson-Sauerbruch-Herrmannsdorfer.” Miinch, med
Wochnschr. 76:1565, Sep. 1929.
daughter of Max Gerson. Under her father’s tutelage,
Charlotte learned about the remarkable nutritional
therapy that has saved the health of thousands, including
Nobel Peace Prize winner Dr. Albert Schweitzer, a
lifelong advocate of The Gerson Therapy®. Charlotte has
supervised the training of medical staff at the Gerson
Institute and at hospitals licensed to teach the Gerson
Institute method. She has lectured on the benefits of
nutritional therapy at several hundred health
organizations worldwide, including the Cancer Control
Society, the National Health Federation, and the
International Association of Cancer Victors and Friends.
A staunch practitioner of holistic medicine, Charlotte
Gerson is a living testament to the Gerson Therapy’s
message: now in her seventies, she shows no typical
signs of aging— no osteoporosis, no corrective lenses, no
liver spots or wrinkles—and has more energy than women
half her age!

Morton Walker, D.P.M., is a respected medical journalist
with 74 bestselling health books to his credit and 23
journalism awards for his work. He is published in 32
countries, and 14 of his titles have sold over 150,000
copies. In 1992, he received the Humanitarian Award
from the American Cancer Control Society, which named
him “the world’s leading medical journalist specializing in
holistic medicine.” Dr. Walker has appeared on over
2,000 press interviews, radio programs, and television
shows, including Oprah! and Live with Regis and Kathie
Lee.
